A Quantitative Evaluation of the Relative Status of
Journal and Conference Publications in Computer Science
Lorcan Coyle, Jill Freyne, Barry Smyth, and P´adraig Cunningham
School of Computer Science and Informatics,
University College Dublin, Ireland
Technical Report UCD-CSI-2008-08
October 2008
Abstract. While it is universally held by computer scientists that conference publications
have a higher status in computer science than in other disciplines there is little quantitative
evidence in support of this position. The importance of journal publications in academic
promotion makes this a big issue since a focus on journal papers only will miss many
signiﬁcant papers published at conferences in computer science. In this paper we set out
to quantify the relative importance of journal and conference papers in computer science.
We show that computer science papers in leading conferences match the impact of papers
in mid-ranking journals and surpass the impact of papers in journals in the bottom half of
the ISI rankings – when impact is measured by citations in Google Scholar. We also show
that there is a poor correlation between this measure of impact and conference acceptance
rates. This indicates that conference publication is an ineﬃcient market where venues that
are equally challenging in terms of rejection rates oﬀer quite diﬀerent returns in terms of
citations.
1
Introduction
How to measure the quality of academic research, and how to evaluate the performance of
particular researchers, has always led to a signiﬁcant degree of debate among researchers
and research institutions. Many feel that performance assessment is an exercise in futil-
ity, in part because they believe that academic research cannot (or should not) be boiled
down to a set of simple performance metrics, and in part because they argue that any
attempt to introduce such metrics will expose the entire research enterprise to manipu-
lation and gaming. On the other hand, many do recognise the need for some reasonable
way to evaluate academic performance, and argue that even imperfect systems help to
shed suﬃcient light on the quality issue, enough to guide funding agencies and tenure
committees to make more informed decisions, for example.
One long-standing way to evaluate academic performance is by an assessment of
publication output. It is best practice for academics to write-up key research contribu-
tions as a scholarly article for submission to a relevant journal or conference, and the
peer-review model has stood the test of time as a way to govern the quality of accepted
articles. However, the modern world of academic publication now accommodates a broad
range of publication opportunities which have led to a continuum of quality, where there
is a very signiﬁcant gap between the lower and upper reaches of this continuum; for
example, journal papers are routinely considered to be superior than conference papers,
which in turn are generally considered to be superior to papers presented at smaller
workshops or local symposia. A number of techniques are routinely used for the pur-
pose of evaluating publications and publication outlets, but most are targeted at journal
publications. For example, organisations such as the Institute for Scientiﬁc Information
(ISI) record and assess the number of citations that are attracted by leading journals
(and some select conferences) in order to compute metrics such as the impact factor of
a journal as a basic measure of its ability to attract citations. Less reliable indicators of
publication quality are available to judge conference quality; for example the rejection
rate of a conference is often cited as a quality indicator [1, 2], on the grounds that high
rejection rates suggest a more selective review process that is capable of turning out
higher quality papers. However, as always, the devil is in the details, and the details in
this case can vary greatly between academic disciplines and sub-disciplines.
In this paper we examine the issue of publication quality from a computer sci-
ence/engineering perspective. We will describe how common publication practices diﬀer
from those of other disciplines, in that computer science/engineering research is pre-
dominantly published in conferences rather than in journals. This presents an important
challenge when it comes to evaluating computer science research output because tra-
ditional impact metrics are better suited to evaluating journal rather than conference
publications. In an eﬀort to legitimize the role of conferences papers to the wider commu-
nity we present an impact measure, based on an analysis of Google Scholar citation data,
that is well suited to computer science conferences. We validate this new measure with
a large-scale experiment, covering 8,764 conference and journal papers, to demonstrate
a strong correlation between traditional journal impact and our new citation score. The
results of this study speak to the value of conferences within computer science. They
highlight how leading conferences compare favorably to mid-ranking journals, surpass-
ing the impact of journals in the bottom half of the traditional ISI ranking. In turn,
we discuss a number of interesting anomalies within the computer science conference
circuit, highlighting how conferences with similar rejection rates (one traditional way
to evaluate conferences) can attract quite diﬀerent citation levels. We also note some
interesting geographical variations, particularly with respect to the ability of equivalent
European and U.S. conferences to attract citations.
2
Publication Practice in Computer Science
Computer science, is a relatively new ﬁeld of study — the ﬁrst schools of computer science
emerged as recently as the 1980’s — and it can be diﬀerentiated from many disciplines
in some important respects. Certainly, in recent times the pace of innovation in the ﬁeld
has proven to be unusually rapid and this has, in part, led to some unusual publication
practices, at least by the standard of more traditional disciplines. As already stated,
in computer science, conference papers are considered to be a more important form of
publication than is generally the case in many other scientiﬁc disciplines. When computer
scientists have some interesting or signiﬁcant research results to report they prepare a
conference paper to present at the international conference for their research community,
for example at IJCAI or AAAI, for researchers working in Artiﬁcial Intelligence or at
COLING for researchers in computational linguistics. If the research is accepted for
publication at the conference this will normally count as the ‘archival’ publication for
that research.
In some circumstances the research might also be published in an extended form in
a journal. For example the Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine journal publishes extended
conference papers from various related medical conferences. In the computer science ﬁeld
conference papers are usually submitted as full papers and they undergo a comprehensive
peer-review evaluation, usually involving 3-5 external reviewers. As a result, the leading
computer science conferences can have very high rejection rates, resulting in high quality
papers that attract considerable attention (and citations) from other researchers. This is
in stark contrast to the role of conferences in other disciplines, where conference papers
usually take the form of extended abstracts that are not subject to the full rigor of peer-
review, and that, as a consequence, rarely attract the same critical attention of other
researchers. In these other disciplines the only archival publications are journal papers.
This matters because of the important role that publications play in academic pro-
motions and other forms of research assessment. When such assessments typically span
many disciplines, it is not unusual to ﬁnd conference papers excluded, with only journal
papers (and perhaps books and book chapters) considered as eligible. Given the pre-
ponderance of conference papers in computer science, this places computer scientists
at a distinct disadvantage relative to their peers in other disciplines. The situation is
exacerbated by the fact that there is often a complete lack of understanding of the other
point of view on this issue. Many computer scientists feel that conferences are a timely
and appropriate means of disseminating research results and some view publishing in
journals as somewhat superﬂuous – the relatively low ISI impact factors for computer
science journals are evidence of this. The tradition of publishing work in a conference
venue rather than a journal is advantageous to researchers in the computer science ﬁeld
for many reasons. Firstly the ﬁeld of computer science research tends to be fast paced
and the “publish or perish” dictate holds strong. The time frame from submission to
publication release for a conference is often less than half that of a similar journal al-
lowing the latest ﬁnding to be public knowledge rapidly. A further traditional research
trend in Computer Science is the sharing of ﬁndings with other researchers in the area [3].
This is facilitated ﬁrstly by the peer review model, where valued feedback is provided,
through the oral presentations at conferences, and the physical co-location of experts
in the ﬁeld during the event. By contrast, researchers from other ﬁelds feel that if the
research had any merit it would have been published in a journal and argue that the
solution for computer scientists has to be to focus on journal publications as a matter
of urgency.
The computer science viewpoint is greatly weakened by the obvious variability that
exists among computer science conferences and by the lack of any real objective mea-
sure, comparable to journal impact, as a way to evaluate these conferences. There is
certainly a lot of variability between computer science conferences. Some of the leading
conferences have rejection rates as high as 70–80%, while others reject signiﬁcantly less
papers than they accept. However, the rejection rate of a conference, the argument usu-
ally goes, is not an adequate measure of quality. A more objective measure of conference
quality is needed, one that can be readily computed, and that approximates a measure
of conference impact.
3
Methodology
Until recently, the ability to oﬀer large-scale bibliographic database services, such as the
type of citation analysis at the foundation of journal impact assessment, was limited to
organisations such as ISI/Thompson Scientiﬁc, who maintained citation databases cover-
ing thousands of academic journals. This service is now available online via ISI’s Web of
Knowledge1 service, which provides researchers and other interested parties with access
to a wide range of bibliographic and citation analysis services. However, the coverage
of the ISI’s Web of Knowledge is limited. It focuses mainly on journals and, as such,
excludes many of the common publications targeted by computer science researchers.
Recently the emergence of services such as CiteSeer2 and Google Scholar3 have helped
to address this gap by maintaining online citation databases that provide better coverage
of conference proceedings as well as journals. For example, Google Scholar automatically
extracts citation information from a wide range of online publications sources, from
large-scale professional services such as Springer-Link to the publication lists that are
maintained by individual researchers on their home pages. As a result it is now feasible
to perform large-scale citation analyses by mining the Google Scholar database. In this
section we describe one such study, which covers more than 8,000 articles from a wide
range of conferences and journals, in an attempt to develop a measure of impact, based
on Google Scholar data.
3.1
ISI Impact
By far the most popular single score used to assess the impact of research journals is
the ISI journal impact factor. This is based on the seminal work on citation analysis
by Garﬁeld [4]. In a given year the ISI impact of a journal will be the average number
of citations in the previous year to articles in the two preceding years. In 2008 the ISI
impact factor for a journal is the average number of citations found in 2007 publications
to papers from that journal published in 2005 and 2006. In our analysis we use the
average of the three most recent published ISI scores, i.e. the ISI impact factors from
2005, 2006 and 2007.
Because of what the ISI Impact factor sets out to do – assigning a numeric score on
the quality of scientiﬁc publications – it has inevitably drawn a lot of criticism over the
years [5–8]. Some of the key criticisms are [7]:
1 ISI’s Web of Knowledge website is here: http://www.isiknowledge.com
2 CiteSeer’s webpage is here: http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu
3 Google Scholar’s webpage is here: http://scholar.google.com/
– The impact factor correlates poorly with the citation counts for individual articles.
– There is no correction for self-citation, either at an author or journal level.
– The coverage of the database is not complete.
– The score is based on a short time window.
– Long papers with long lists of references (e.g. review papers) distort the score.
Some of the criticisms of the ISI Impact factor are addressed by Garﬁeld in a paper
published in the British Medical Journal [9]. In particular he addresses the issue that
this score is based on publications in a two year time window and thus may not be
appropriate for disciplines with longer research cycles and a longer citation ‘half-life’.
Garﬁeld demonstrates that the ranking of medical journals based on a cumulated impact
factor (cumulated over a 14 year period) correlates well with the ISI Impact as actually
calculated.
In this paper we are not concerned with criticizing the ISI Impact factor, instead we
wish to demonstrate that our impact factor based on Google Scholar (GS) correlates well
with it. A sample of the ISI impact factors for a subset of computer science journals are
presented in Table 1; this table also includes the GS impact factors for these journals,
which we will return to in a later section. For now it is suﬃcient to note that these
journals span a range of ISI impact factors with the top ranking International Journal of
Computer Vision enjoying an impact of 4.37 while Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering
Design, Analysis and Manufacturing presents with a more modest impact of 0.27. In the
period under consideration (2005 to 2007) the median ISI impact factor for computer
science journals varied between 0.80 and 0.84. Given this median we divide these journals
into three tiers according to their impact factors: high-ranking (A*) journals have impact
factors ≥2; medium-ranking (A) journals have impact factors ≥0.9 but < 2; low-ranking
(B) journals have impact factors < 0.9. So our A and A* categories represent journals
in the top half of the ISI ranking. Computer science journals not considered in the ISI
ranking (of which there are many) are not considered in the study.
3.2
Google Scholar & DBLP
Google Scholar is an attempt to bring Google-like search to bibliographic data. As such
it provides a familiar Google-style search interface, allowing searchers to locate research
articles based on a wide range of features, including article features (author, title etc.),
publication features (type, year, name etc,), and a range of subject ﬁlters. Google Scholar
responds to a query with a result-list in which each result corresponds to a particular
article. For example, Figure 1 presents a portion of the results for a search for articles by
Marvin Minsky. Each result includes information about the article type, the article title,
the authors and publication data. Importantly, each result also contains citation data.
For example, the third result, which corresponds to Minsky’s famous “A Framework
for Representing Knowledge” article [10], indicates that Google Scholar has found 3350
citations to this book in its database. Moreover, following this citation link will lead
directly to a list of these 3350 citations.
Thus Google Scholar provides access to the necessary bibliographic data to perform a
large scale citation analysis of a wide range of computer science conferences and journals
Category Journal Name
ISI IF GS IF
A*
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV)
4.37
27
IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
(PAMI)
3.9
34
Journal of the ACM (JACM)
2.73
35
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
2.63
22
Machine Learning (ML)
2.47
32.5
A
IEEE Trans. on Knowledge and Data Engineering (TKDE)
1.93
15
AI in Medicine (ARTMED)
1.77
12
Information Retrieval (IR)
1.5
9.5
Computational Intelligence (CI)
1.3
9
Data and Knowledge Engineering (DKE)
1.2
8
Decision Support Systems (DSS)
1.07
17.5
B
AI Communications (AICOM)
0.57
4
International Journal of Pattern Recognition (IJPRAI)
0.5
4
Pattern Analysis Applications (PAA)
0.5
8
Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and Man-
ufacturing (AIEDAM)
0.27
5
Table 1. This table summarizes the impact factors of the journals included in the evaluation. The
column ISI IF gives the mean 2005-2007 ISI Impact Factor and the column GS IF gives the impact
factor we have calculated based on Google Scholar.
  
 
Web    Images    Video    News    Maps    more »
author:"Marvin Minsky"
 
Search   
Advanced Scholar Search
Scholar Preferences
Scholar Help
 Scholar   All articles - Recent articles 
Results 1 - 30 of about 346 for author:"Marvin Minsky". (0.27 seconds) 
A Framework for Representing Knowledge
M Minsky - 1974 - portal.acm.org
Google, Inc. (search), Subscribe (Full Service), Register (Limited Service, Free),
Login. Search: The ACM Digital Library The Guide. Feedback. A Framework for
Representing Knowledge. Source, Technical Report: AIM-306. Year of Publication: ...
Cited by 3350 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 8 versions
[BOOK] The society of mind
M Minsky - 1986 - Simon & Schuster, Inc. New York, NY, USA
Cited by 2749 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 3 versions
[BOOK] Perceptrons
ML Minsky - MIT Press
Cited by 1770 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX
[BOOK] Computation: finite and infinite machines
ML Minsky - 1967 - Prentice-Hall, Inc. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA
Cited by 1324 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 6 versions
[BOOK] Perceptrons: an introduction to computational geometry
ML Minsky, S Papert - 1969 - ams.org
1. A. Gersho, Automatic equalization technique for multilevel pulse
transmission, Bell Telephone Laboratories Technical Memorandum, MM 65-1381-13,
Dec. 1965. 2. A. Gersho, Adaptive equalization of highly dispersive ...
Cited by 1201 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 4 versions
[PDF] !Steps toward artificial intelligence
M Minsky - Proc. IRE, 1961 - www-anw.cs.umass.edu
Received by the IRE, October 24, 1960. The author’s work summarized
here—which was done at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, a center for research
operated by MIT at Lexington, Mass., with the joint Support of the US Army, ...
Cited by 624 - Related articles - View as HTML - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - All 8 versions
[BOOK] Semantic Information Processing
ML Minsky - 1969 - The MIT Press
Cited by 349 - Related articles - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 2 versions
[PDF] !Engines of creation
KE Drexler, M Minsky - 1986 - xaonon.dyndns.org
K. Eric Drexler’s Engines of Creation is an enormously original book about the
consequences of new technologies. It is ambitious and imaginative and, best of
all, the thinking is technically sound. But how can anyone predict where ...
Cited by 306 - Related articles - View as HTML - Web Search - Import into BibTeX - Library Search - All 4 versions
MICROSCOPY APPARATUS
M Minsky - US Patent 3,013,467, 1961 - Google Patents
3,013,467 MICROSCOPY APPARATUS Marvin Minsky, 44 Bowdoin St., Cambridge, Mass.
Filed NOT. 7, 1957, Ser. No. 695,107 4Claims. (Cl. 88—14) 5My invention
Fig. 1. The results of a Google Scholar query for documents authored by Marvin Minsky
– given an article Google Scholar will provide its citation count and full details on the
other articles that cite it – all that is required is a suitable list of articles to seed the
analysis. This is where a service like the Digital Bibliography & Library Project (DBLP)
comes in to play [11]. DBLP is a publication database of a diﬀerent type. It is a large
archive of publication records, documenting the papers published in a wide range of
conferences, journals, as well as some workshops and symposia. DBLP does not provide
any citation data but it can be used to provide a suitable list of seed articles for analysis.
5. ICCBR 2003: Trondheim, Norway
Kevin D. Ashley, Derek G. Bridge (Eds.): Case-Based Reasoning Research and Development, 5th International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning,
ICCBR 2003, Trondheim, Norway, June 23-26, 2003, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2689 Springer 2003, ISBN 3-540-40433-3 BibTeX
Invited Talks
David B. Leake:
Human-Centered CBR: Integrating Case-Based Reasoning with Knowledge Construction and Extension. 1
Electronic Edition (Springer LINK) BibTeX
Héctor Muñoz-Avila:
On the Role of the Cases in Case-Based Planning. 2-3
Electronic Edition (Springer LINK) BibTeX
Ellen Riloff:
From Manual Knowledge Engineering to Bootstrapping: Progress in Information Extraction and NLP. 4
Electronic Edition (Springer LINK) BibTeX
Scientiﬁc Papers
Kareem S. Aggour, Marc Pavese, Piero P. Bonissone, William Cheetham:
SOFT-CBR: A Self-Optimizing Fuzzy Tool for Case-Based Reasoning. 5-19
Electronic Edition (Springer LINK) BibTeX
Josep Lluís Arcos, Maarten Grachten, Ramon López de Mántaras:
Extracting Performers' Behaviors to Annotate Cases in a CBR System for Musical Tempo Transformations. 20-34
Electronic Edition (Springer LINK) BibTeX
Paolo Avesani, Sara Ferrari, Angelo Susi:
Case-Based Ranking for Decision Support Systems. 35-49
Fig. 2. A screenshot showing DBLP’s page for ICCBR 2003. The conference’s details are shown as well
as a list of all of its papers. Here is listed three invited talks and the ﬁrst three of 51 full papers (listed
as Scientiﬁc Papers here).
3.3
A Measure of Impact Based on Google Scholar
For the purpose of our study we chose to focus on articles from conferences and journals
in the areas of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning. The reasons are two-fold.
First, both areas are very mature and active areas of research within computer science.
Second, they are areas that are very familiar to the authors of this paper, which proved
useful when it came to selecting appropriate seed conferences and journals, and also
when it came to independently verifying the results of the study.
For this study then, we chose to focus on 15 conferences and 15 journals between the
years of 2000 and 2003, inclusive; see Tables 1 and 2. These conferences and journals
included ﬁrst, second, and third tier venues, roughly in line with ISI’s rankings. All of the
listed conferences and journals were covered by DBLP and the 15 conferences provided
access to 3,258 articles, while the 15 journals provided access to 5,506 articles.
Each article was extracted from the DBLP XML records4 and submitted in turn to
Google Scholar. Using Google Scholar’s advanced search options queries were constructed
to return the Google scholar entry for each seed article and the necessary citation data
was extracted. During this process care was taken not to overload Google Scholar with
requests and the data was gathered over a time frame of a few weeks in early 2008.
As mentioned Google Scholar compiles its repository from professional services and re-
searcher maintained pages. In terms of coverage we found that Google Scholar success-
fully returned citation lists for 89.5% of our seed set with the missing articles being
evenly distributed between the journal and conference seed paper sets. The end result
is that each article successfully located using Google Scholar is associated with a total
number of citations, and these basic citation counts can then be aggregated at the level
of individual conferences (or conference series) and journals; eﬀectively our GS impact
measure for a conference is the average GS citation rate of the articles at the conference
in question.
Conference Name GS IF Years Covered
AAAI
20
2000, 2002
IJCAI
17
2001, 2003
AH
17
2000, 2002
ICML
14
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
ECCV
13.5
2000, 2002
UAI
13
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
NIPS
12
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
COLING
9
2000, 2002
TREC
8
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
ECCBR
8
2000, 2002
ECML
7
2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
ECAI
7
2000, 2002
ICCBR
6
2001, 2003
GECCO
5
2000, 2002, 2003
ICANN
3
2001, 2002, 2003
Table 2. The overall Google Scholar Impact Factor and years covered (this refers to the years each
conference was held) for each conference proceedings published during the years 2000-2003
Table 1 shows both the ISI impact factors and our Google Scholar impact factors for
the 15 test journals for which we had reliable impact factors available from ISI. A key
question concerns the correlation between the ISI impact and Google Scholar impact. If
there is not a strong correlation between these impact factors then we cannot be conﬁdent
4 The DBLP XML records are available here: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/xml/
that the Google Scholar impact measure is capturing the essence of ISI impact. These
ISI and Google Scholar impact factors are plotted in Figure 3 and it should be clear
from the ﬁgure that the two impact factors are well correlated. The Pearson correlation
coeﬃcient between the ISI and Google Scholar impact factors is 0.86. It is also worth
considering an alternative correlation statistic, especially given that we are interested
in ranking publications based on these impact factors. When ranking is the primary
objective Spearman rank correlation may be a more relevant statistic. It turns out that
there is a rank correlation of 0.88, between ISI and Google Scholar impact factors, for
all journals included in the study.
IJCV 
PAMI 
JACM 
ML 
AI 
TKDE 
IR 
ARTMED 
DKE 
CI 
DSS 
IJPRAI 
AICOM 
AIEDAM 
PAA 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
3.5 
4 
4.5 
5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Fig. 3. A scatter plot showing the correlation between the Google Scholar Impact Factor (on the x-axis)
and the ISI Impact Factor (on the y-axis).
The strength of the correlation between ISI and GS impact factors bodes well for
our study. It suggests that our GS impact factor is capturing the essence of ISI impact,
which is of course the gold-standard for journal ranking. The beneﬁt of our GS impact
factor, however, is that it can be used to evaluate both conferences and journals, based
on Google Scholar data, in order to systematically compare journal and conference paper
impact.
4
Comparison of Journal and Conference Citations
In the previous section we proposed a straightforward metric for assessing the impact of
scientiﬁc publications based an aggregate citation count using Google Scholar citation
data. We validated this GS impact factor by demonstrating a strong correlation between
this metric and the more standard ISI impact factor, across a validation-set of journals.
In this section we describe the GS results over the larger set of conferences and journals,
which form the basis of our more comprehensive analysis.
As mentioned previously we have divided our validation-set of journals into three
basic classes, A*, A, and B, according to their ISI impact factor. Having computed the
GS impact factors for these journals we can now place them on a continuum, as shown in
Figure 4. Figure 4 also shows the positions of the 15 test conference series on this same
continuum as the basis of a more direct comparison between journals and conferences.
Overall the results clearly show that many of the conferences under evaluation per-
form well compared to the benchmark journals. Clearly the A* journals stand out in their
ability to attract citations and we note how the leading journals such as the Journal of
the ACM, Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, and Machine Learning succeed in
obtaining GS impact factors above 30. That being said, it is interesting to note how well
many of the conferences perform, particularly in relation to the category A journals.
Top of the conference ranking is AAAI, with a GS impact factor of 20 placing it in
the lower reaches of the A* journals so that it compares favourably with the Journal of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence. The category A journals correspond to GS impact factors from
8 to 19, which accommodate a wide range of computer science conferences, from the
International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) and the International
Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems (AH), with GS
impact factors of 17, down to the European Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (EC-
CBR) and the Text Retrieval Conference (TREC), which achieve GS impact factors of
8.
5
Conference Impact and Rejection Rates
One commonly held view is that conference rejection rates serve as a useful proxy for
future impact. Indeed rejection rates are sometimes accepted for this purpose in various
research assessment exercises, including academic promotions. It is useful then to con-
sider the relationship between conference rejection rates and expected citation count,
based on our GS impact factor, to see whether this view holds up. Figure 5 presents
these data as a scatter plot of GS impact factor against conference rejection rates for
23 individual conferences across the 15 conference series under evaluation. Note that
Fig. 4. This diagram presents a uniﬁed picture of CS journals and conferences ranked according to our
Google Scholar impact factor.
the data points in Figure 5 reﬂect a subset of the full set of conferences, namely those
conferences for which reliable rejection rates could be obtained5.
AAAI 2000 
IJCAI 2001 
UAI 2000 
UAI 2002 
ECCV 2002 
ICML 2001 
ICML 2000 
IJCAI 2003 
AAAI 2002 
ICML 2003 
NIPS 2001 
NIPS 2002 
UAI 2001 
ICML 2002 
ECML 2001 
UAI 2003 NIPS 2003 
ECAI 2000 
ECCBR 2002 
ECAI 2002 
ECML 2000 
GECCO 2003 
ICCBR 2003 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
0.25 
0.35 
0.45 
0.55 
0.65 
0.75 
0.85 
Fig. 5. A scatter plot showing the correlation between rejection rates for a subset of conferences (on the
x-axis) and GS impact factors versus (on the y-axis), where reliable rejection rates were available.
While the results indicate that there is some correlation between GS impact factor
and rejection rates the Pearson correlation score of 0.54 is not very convincing and re-
ﬂects the considerable variation that exists when it comes to the relationship between
conference rejection rates and the ability of conferences to attract citations. There are
conferences with similar rejection rates but which achieve very diﬀerent GS impact fac-
tors. Equally, there are conferences with very diﬀerent rejection rates which achieve very
similar GS impact factors. For instance, AAAI achieves a GS impact factor of 20 with
5 Further information on the sources of these rejection rates are available on the living dataset website
for this research at http://lorcancoyle.org/research/citationanalysis
a rejection rate of about 65-75%. By comparison, its European sister conference, ECAI,
is just as selective but achieves a median GS impact factor of only 7 (as shown in Table
3). As another example, the 2002 European Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (EC-
CBR) had a rejection rate of approximately 0.33 and a GS impact factor of 7, achieving
a citation rate that is better that conferences such as ECML 2000 and ECAI 2002, which
have twice its rejection rate.
AAAI
ECAI
Year
GS
RR GS RR
2000
24.5 67% 9
69%
2002
14
75% 6
72%
Overall 20
7
Table 3. GS impact factors of AAAI versus ECAI in 2000 and 2002 with corresponding rejection rates
(RR). (AAAI and ECAI are both held every two years.)
It is interesting to note the apparent bias that exists between well cited U.S. con-
ferences and their similarly selective, though less well cited European counterparts. The
AAAI-ECAI example above is a case in point. Both conferences target the same re-
search area and attract their submissions from a similar community of researchers in a
way that is equally selective. And yet the US-centric AAAI enjoys an expected citation
count (computed from the product of the median citation count and the rejection rate
of the conference) that is more than twice that of ECAI; see also Table 3.
This regional bias is also evident in another pair of related conferences, namely
ICML and ECML; see Table 4. Once again, the more US-centric ICML conference series
is capable of attracting far more citations that a similarly selective Euro-centric ECML
conference series. ICML has an expected citation count that is twice that of ECML.
ICML
ECML
Year
GS RR GS
RR
2000
15 56% 6
57%
2001
16 68% 10.5 62%
2002
11 67% 6
63%
2003
14 68% 9
78%
Overall 14
7
Table 4. GS impact factors of ICML versus ECML for the years 2000 and 2003 inclusively with corre-
sponding rejection rates (RR).
To test the correlation between GS impact factor and rejection rate further we ex-
amined the data available for three conference series which took place in each of the
four years covered by our study; UAI, ICML, and ECML are the only conferences that
occurred and had published rejection rates available in every year of our study. Table
5 shows the GS impact factors and rejection rates for each year in the study. What
is interesting here is that there is no signiﬁcant correlation between rejection rate and
GS impact factor. The Pearson score for UAI is only 0.27, for ICML it is -0.24 and for
ECML it is 0.42. This suggests that, at least for these conferences, the yearly changes
in rejection rates have little bearing on the expected citation count.
UAI
ICML
ECML
Year GS RR GS RR GS RR
2000 17 64% 15 56%
6
57%
2001 11 60% 16 68% 10.5 62%
2002 16 66% 11 67%
6
63%
2003 10 66% 14 68%
9
78%
Table 5. Median GS impact factors for UAI, ICML and ECML from 2000 and 2003 with corresponding
rejection rates (RR).
In summary then, these results highlight that any assumed relationship between
conference rejection rates and the ability of conferences to attract citations is at best weak
and in reality other factors must play a more critical role when it comes to inﬂuencing
future citations.
6
Conclusions
Evaluating research output is a complex, challenging, and contentious issue. Funding
agencies argue the need for comprehensive research evaluation metrics so that they may
objectively assess the return on their research investment, and increasingly, academic in-
stitutions are relying on similar metrics when it comes to guiding academic promotions.
When it comes to publication output there is general consensus about the importance of
citations as an important factor when it comes to evaluating research papers and a num-
ber of well-deﬁned objective metrics are commonly used. For example, the ISI maintains
comprehensive records of the citations attracted by leading academic journals, provid-
ing the raw materials for tried and tested metrics such as impact factor. Unfortunately
not all disciplines are equally well served by such approaches, especially given their bias
towards journal papers. In this paper, for example, we have highlighted how computer
science research has traditionally placed a greater emphasis on conference publications
and how, as a result, computer science researchers can suﬀer when it comes to ISI-based
research assessment. Simply put, conference papers are generally excluded from such
evaluation exercises.
In this paper we have examined the issue of publication quality from a computer sci-
ence/engineering perspective. Our main focus has been to justify the common publication
practices in these disciplines by demonstrating how leading computer science/engineering
conferences can attract signiﬁcant numbers of citations that are in-line with leading jour-
nals. We do this by performing a citation analysis on almost 9,000 conference and journal
papers, drawing on citation data from Google Scholar, and aligning these citations with
ISI journal rankings. The results highlight a number of important points:
1. There is a strong correlation between the citation impact factors computed from the
Google Scholar data and comparable data from the ISI index, thus validating the use
of our new GS impact factor as an alternative citation-based evaluation metric that
is applicable to both journals and conferences.
2. The conferences surveyed in this analysis perform well in comparison to the journals.
A signiﬁcant number of conferences achieve median citation rates that are comparable
with category A (ISI) journals for example.
3. The long-held view that conference rejection rates are a good proxy for conference
quality did not hold up to scrutiny as we found a low coeﬃcient of correlation between
the rejection rate of a conference and its GS impact factor.
4. There is evidence of a strong regional bias between similar conferences, with U.S.-
centric conferences attracting much greater numbers of citations that their non-U.S.
counterparts.
Ultimately we hope that this work will serve to shed some light on the contentious
issue of publication best-practice within the computing sciences. The strongly held view
(by computer scientists) that conference publications are an important and valuable
publication target is supported by the results of this study, as evidenced by the high
citation rates enjoyed by many computer science conferences compared to well-respected
journals. The results do not, however, lend support to the argument that conference
rejection rates serve as a reliable proxy for quality.
Obviously this study is but a starting point. It needs to be extended before the
argument supporting conference publications can be reliably applied across other sub-
disciplines within computer science, and we hope that the methodology adopted here
will be readily reused by others, so that computer science researchers can justify their
publication practices in multi-disciplinary research assessment exercises going forward.
References
1. Long, P.M., Lee, T.K., Jaﬀar, J.: Benchmarking research performance in department of computer
science, school of computing, national university of singapore. available online at: http://www.comp.
nus.edu.sg/~tankl/bench.html (accessed 20th September 2008) (1999)
2. Butler, L.: ICT assessment: Moving beyond journal outputs. Scientometrics 74(1) (2008) 39–55
3. Patterson, D., Snyder, L., Ullman, J.: Best Practices Memo, Evaluating Computer Scientists and
Engineers For Promotion and Tenure, August 1999. Computing Research News (1999)
4. Garﬁeld, E.: Citation Indexes for Science. Science 122(3159) (1955) 108–111
5. Cole, J., Cole, S.: Measuring the quality of sociological research: problems in the use of the Science
Citation Index. American Sociologist 6(1) (1971) 23–29
6. MacRoberts, M., MacRoberts, B.: Problems of citation analysis. Scientometrics 36(3) (1996) 435–
444
7. Seglen, P.: Why the impact factor of journals should not be used for evaluating research. BMJ
314(7079) (1997) 498–502
8. Cronin, B.: Bibliometrics and beyond: some thoughts on web-based citation analysis. Journal of
Information Science 27(1) (2001) 1
9. Garﬁeld, E.: How can impact factors be improved. British Medical Journal 313(7054) (1996) 411–413
10. Minsky, M.: A framework for representing knowledge. Technical report, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA (1974)
11. Ley, M., Reuther, P.: Maintaining an online bibliographical database: The problem of data quality.
In Ritschard, G., Djeraba, C., eds.: Extraction et gestion des connaissances (EGC’2006), Actes
des sixi`emes journ´ees Extraction et Gestion des Connaissances, Lille, France, 17-20 janvier 2006,
2 Volumes. Volume RNTI-E-6 of Revue des Nouvelles Technologies de l’Information., C´epadu`es-
´Editions (2006) 5–10
