IMPROVING THE PERSISTENCE OF FIRST-YEAR 
UNDERGRADUATE WOMEN IN COMPUTER SCIENCE 
 
Rita Manco Powell 
University of Pennsylvania 
3330 Walnut Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
215-898-0051 
rpowell@cis.upenn.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a study of undergraduate women’s 
retention in the first-year of the computer science major 
at the University of Pennsylvania for the purpose of 
identifying the underlying issues responsible for attrition. 
The subsequent steps taken by the faculty to improve 
women’s retention is also discussed. 
 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
Gender 
 
General Terms 
Diversity, Curriculum Issues 
 
Keywords 
Gender Issues, Persistence, Attrition, Curriculum 
 
1.   Introduction 
Enrollment in computer science programs nationally 
began to decline after the technology bust at the turn of 
the millennium, but the sharpness of the decline in 
women has been more pronounced.  All science and 
engineering majors have experienced a steady increase 
in women’s participation over the past two decades 
except for computer science.  The goal of a study in the 
2003-04 academic year was to find out why this 
situation was occurring at the University of Pennsylvania 
and determine how Penn’s Department of Computer 
and Information Science could better support women’s 
persistence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.   Background 
Applicants to the University of Pennsylvania apply to 
one of the university’s four undergraduate schools and 
matriculate in that school in the freshman year. Students 
may transfer out of a department and/or a school at the 
end of the freshman year. Most undergraduate attrition 
from the computer science majors for both women and 
men at Penn occurs in the first year of college. Women 
comprise approximately 20 percent of the CIS incoming 
class of declared majors each year.  While more male 
students join the department after the freshman year 
than transfer out, the proportion of women in a class 
decreases. The goal of this study was to understand the 
nature of these women’s experiences in the major, how 
the students’ interpreted these experiences, and the 
impact they had on students’ decision to remain in or 
drop out of the major.  
 
3.   Review of the Literature 
Many women enter computer science programs with far 
less experience with computers than men. From 1996-
2004, girls made up only 16-17 percent of those taking 
the AP Computer Science A exam and approximately 
10 percent of those taking AP Computer Science AB 
exam [3], suggesting girl’s lack of preparation in high 
school to study computer science in competitive 
academic programs in college. The home environment 
highly influences a woman to develop an interest in 
computer science. In their study at Carnegie Mellon 
University, Margolis and Fisher [10] found that 40 
percent of the men and 65 percent of the women came 
from households in which one or both parents were 
involved in computing.  In addition, 75 percent of the 
men in their study fit the profile of someone who was 
magnetically attracted to computers since childhood, 
while only 25 percent of the women fit this profile. 
Although men as well as women are drawn to computer 
science for the challenge and the opportunities afforded 
by the discipline to solve problems and advance the 
body of knowledge in diverse fields, the mythology of 
the computing “geek” who has an inordinate 24/7 
fascination with the computer pervades current 
interpretations of who does computer science. However, 
Blum and Friege [2] found that after the freshman year, 
male and female students who persisted in computer 
science claimed to fit in well with the computing culture 
both academically and socially. 
 
In college, aspects of the classroom and lab 
environment can deter women’s persistence. Being 
subjected to a locker-room environment, enduring 
inappropriate language and continuous rude and 
patronizing behavior, and feeling like they constantly 
must prove themselves and their right to be there 
isolates women in computer science, forming the basis 
for the chilly climate hypothesis in the discipline [1], [8], 
[9], [13]. Although Strenta et al [14] found no evidence 
for a chilly climate hypothesis in science, math and 
engineering majors because for those whose grades 
were the same, persistence was the same, their 
research did detect a significant gender effect in 
women’s persistence in computer science. Increasing 
the critical mass of women was found to increase 
women’s persistence in the computer science major [5], 
[10], [11].There is little evidence that negative 
experiences with faculty are a factor in women’s attrition 
in computer science. Rather it is more what faculty fails 
to do in terms of mentoring that cause women to 
consider leaving science, math and engineering majors.  
The presence of female faculty is critically important to 
making the participation of women in a discipline appear 
and feel normal.  However, the presence of a lone 
female advisor, which is often the case, will not be 
enough to address the difficulties women students 
experience because of their minority status [4], [6], [12]. 
Women Teaching Assistants and upperclass students 
can nurture undergraduate students, serve as role 
models and mentors, and help undergraduates to stay 
grounded and focused in the major.   
 
4.   The Situation at Penn 
In the 2003-04 academic year, all first-year computer 
science students enrolled in a two semester course 
sequence CSE 120 and 121, Introduction to 
Programming and Techniques I and II and the labs 
associated with these courses, CSE 130 and 131. 
Enrollment and graduation records show that CIS 
graduates close to the same number of students that 
the department admits. The transfer-in of students into 
the department masks the attrition out of the 
department. In the academic year prior to this research 
study, 5 of 11 students or 45 percent that switched out 
of CIS from November 2002 through May 2003 were 
women. Conversely, only 1 of the 14 students or 7 
percent who transferred into CIS during this same time 
period was a woman.  Women made up 25 percent of 
the introductory computer science course CSE 120 
enrollment in fall 2002.  By January 2003, women 
comprised only 19 percent of CSE 121, the second 
course of the first year sequence.  
 
5.   Research Methodology 
All twenty four women enrolled in CSE 120 in the fall of 
2003 were invited to be a part of this study. Fourteen 
students agreed to participate; all of these students 
reported that they planned to major in computer science 
or were seriously considering the major. The research 
method employed in this study included a series of in-
depth, semi-structured personal interviews beginning in 
fall 2003 and continuing through the following fall. Other 
data sources included two focus groups with the study 
participants, a focus group with nine male students in 
the first-year courses, and a focus group with the 
combined female study group and male first-year focus 
group. The study participants were also asked to keep 
journals to record their experiences in computer 
science. In addition, personal interviews with faculty and 
administrators, teaching assistants, and female 
graduate students at the University of Pennsylvania 
informed this study. The names of all of the students in 
this study have been changed to maintain their 
anonymity. 
 
The small sample size of this population made it difficult 
to derive meaningful results from statistical research 
methods. An ethnographic, qualitative approach was 
taken to examine the unique experiences of each 
individual in the study group and determine what 
support the department could provide to positively 
impact her persistence in the major. While this research 
approach cannot draw conclusions that may be 
generalized to women in other schools, it provided 
reliable data on the study participants’ personal 
experiences and a context within which their decisions 
to persist with or leave the computer science major at 
the University of Pennsylvania could be examined. 
Therefore, this study may serve as a useful comparison 
to other schools and departments of computer science 
grappling with the issues surrounding their own female 
students’ persistence. 
 
6.   Issues Impacting Persistence:  The 
Students’ Accounts 
More than half of the study participants’ fathers and 
several of their mothers were computer scientists or 
engineers, suggesting the importance of early modeling 
and encouragement of technology careers for girls. The 
participants described how their families and middle and 
high school teachers had nurtured their aptitude for 
mathematics, and excelling in mathematics in high 
school was a major contributory factor in their decision 
to study computer science at Penn. Although the study 
participants’ pre-college background included a 
thorough grounding in math and science, most 
participants reported an inadequate exposure to 
computer science in high school. As mentioned earlier, 
although no previous experience with computing was 
required in the first course in the major, many of the 
male students in the class actually had a great deal of 
prior experience from high school, while other male 
students claimed to have this prior experience. Both 
academically and psychologically, the disparity in prior 
experience with computing in the first-year class worked 
against the study participants’ motivation in that they 
found it very difficult to keep up with many of their 
classmates.  They perceived that the introductory 
course did not afford them a level playing field on which 
to compete.  One student described how this situation 
had impacted her: 
I remember, for the weekly homework problems we 
had to do in CSE 120, it was often very mind-
boggling and frustrating because I felt like I should 
somehow be explaining on my own [sic] to acquire 
some of the advanced knowledge of programming 
techniques some people in the class already had.  
My friends and I would spend hours and hours 
doing a problem only to find out, after submitting 
the problem, that someone had spent merely 30 
minutes on the same problem not because he was 
a genius or particularly smart (I define being smart 
as being able to go further and faster than anybody 
with whom you have started out on the same foot) 
but because he, with his 3-4 years of experience, 
already knew some tricks on the lessons that were 
to be covered later in the course.  There really is 
nothing more frustrating than this, because you 
never know what you don’t know.  Maybe it’s 
because it was an introductory class, and thus 
everybody was at different levels, but still, you 
really begin to develop learned-helplessness and 
just sort of give up.  
(E. Choi, personal communication, January 18, 
2004) 
 
Although a few of the women were exposed to computer 
programming in high school through the AP A computer 
science course, only one of them took the AP AB 
advanced course. Several of the students reported that 
prior to college they did not participate in computing 
courses and robotics clubs because they did not have 
enough experience in high school to compete with 
males. Most of the women struggled in the first-year of 
their computer science courses to maintain the 
confidence that they could be successful and 
consequently to maintain their interest in the major and 
their belief that it was a good fit for them.  
 
In addition to a lack of prior experience with 
programming, social isolation from faculty and peers in 
the computer science major made the first year difficult 
for many of the women. Social isolation was partially the 
result of the students’ gender minority status in that they 
became acquainted with few of their classmates, and 
they were not included in many of their male 
classmates’ discussions and activities. Several were too 
timid to insert themselves into social situations with their 
classmates, and the first-year courses did not facilitate 
enough interaction among students. One student 
described the effect of being excluded from group 
discussion in lab had on her: 
Today, almost two months into the school year, we 
had our first “group” project in CSE 130 lab … 
While a few of the guys knew each other from 
outside sources and began to chat easily over 
topics of mutual interest, I found conversation 
difficult to begin. Once past asking them their 
name, which a few timidly answered and none ever 
asked mine though I am sure not one knew it, I 
found they would all turn back to one of the other 
guys to continue chatting. It’s odd because even 
one of the guys that I initially had befriended at the 
beginning of the year [acted this way]. 
(G. Pie, personal communication, October, 2003) 
 
The social isolation, which most of the women in the 
study group experienced, was exacerbated by faculty’s 
insistence that students work alone on homework 
programming assignments in the first-year courses, 
referring questions only to their instructor or course TA. 
Working with another student often constituted cheating 
by the faculty, even though many of the students were 
struggling with the same material. This restriction 
marginalized many of the women in the sample by 
limiting their opportunities to become a part of the 
informal social peer network where college has a major 
impact on students. This approach to programming also 
gave students the mistaken impression that software 
engineers work alone in an isolated environment, 
whereas almost all software projects in industry require 
teamwork and collaboration.   
 
Just as these women passed most of the first-year 
knowing few of their classmates, they also made few 
personal acquaintances with faculty.  They did not seek 
out professors during their office hours because they 
feared that they did not have a suitable question to ask 
the professor, and that he would question what 
prompted them to come to his office hours.  Because 
they lacked the courage to approach faculty, most of the 
students relied on Teaching Assistants (TAs) to answer 
their questions concerning course material and 
assignments.  The women were scattered throughout 
seven CSE 130 lab recitation sections, precluding a 
critical mass of women in any one lab section, and most 
became acquainted with few other women in the class 
during the first semester. Although the students enjoyed 
their residential experience at Penn, they encountered 
few computer science majors and no other female 
majors in their college houses. The residential 
experience helped them bind with the broader 
university, but did not especially support their affiliation 
with the School of Engineering and Applied Science or 
the Department of Computer and Information Science.  
Therefore, most of these women passed the first 
semester and a good part of the second semester 
making few, if any, friendships or contacts in 
engineering or computer science.   
 
The participants initially did not value all-women support 
groups in the freshman year.  Several women reported 
that they shunned women’s groups and activities 
designed to support them because they believed that 
their participation in such a group was a tacit admission 
that they were less capable than the men.  In a focus 
group, one student explained:    
There is no guys’ group.  Why is there a girls’ 
group?  I see us just as individuals, not as girls and 
guys.  We are all the same.  If you think women 
need a support group, it’s like women need help, 
they are weaker. 
Although these students were put off by offers early in 
the freshman year to join an all women’s mentoring 
group, their attitudes noticeably changed as the 
freshman year progressed.  By the end of the first-year, 
several students expressed appreciation for all-women’s 
support groups in computer science because they 
provided them with opportunities to discuss academic 
and social issues concerning the major. 
While many women and men differ in their secondary 
school background in computer science, they may also 
differ in their motivations to study computer science in 
college.  Some students become engaged in computer 
science initially through their fascination with the actual 
operating of the computer, while others are more often 
attracted to the applications of computer science to 
diverse fields such as graphics, artificial intelligence, 
cognitive science, and biocomputing [11], [1], [5]. Since 
many women lack pre-college experience with 
computing, their lack of knowledge about the field could 
explain why women tend to look for tangible applications 
for computer science. In the fall focus group, one 
woman described her view of the differences in the 
appeal of the discipline for her as compared to some of 
her male classmates. 
 
It’s not just that the guys have taken classes before. 
I know guys who have Linux on their computers 
because they figured out how to use it. They didn’t 
take a class on it or anything, but they play with it 
constantly.  They like that sort of thing. The easiest 
way to learn CS is to actually do it. You start to 
think you are not the type because you are not 
playing with Linux constantly.  I’m not particularly 
interested in playing with it all the time. I like to be 
able to use it.  
 
(L. Hermine, personal communication, October 
2003)   
 
Although all of the women in this study believed that a 
computer science degree would garner them a good job 
after graduation, most could not visualize or describe 
what that job would be like.  This lack of knowledge of 
the computing field became a significant deterrent to 
persistence for these women because their first college 
experience with computing was limited to programming, 
and they developed the perception of the discipline as a 
solitary activity of writing and debugging code.  Several 
women worried that they did not feel passionate about 
computer science and were not as “gung ho” about 
computer programming as their peers.  Those who did 
not enjoy programming assumed that computer science 
must not be for them, and yet they had little else to look 
to for a possible fit for their interests in the major. 
 
7.   Academic Results of the Study 
Group 
Thirteen of the fourteen study group participants 
completed CSE 120. The only student who did not 
complete the class dropped after the first midterm in 
which she had earned a B. Nine of the fourteen women 
persisted in the major, enrolling in CSE 121/131 in 
January ’04, and all nine continued in the major in the 
following fall. As a group, the study participants 
completed CSE 120 one point below the class mean 
grade and completed CSE 121 one point above the 
class mean.  
 
8.   Impacting Persistence: The 
Department’s Response 
The first-year experience in computer science at Penn 
has significantly changed since 2003.  Through 
curriculum, policies and practices, computer science 
departments can mitigate gendered attrition rates [4].  
The department chair’s teaching CSE 120 has sent a 
strong message of the importance of students’ early 
experiences in the major.  The faculty has created 
multiple pathways into Penn’s computer science majors.  
Now only students with substantial prior experience with 
computer programming from high school and who pass 
a course waiver test are recommended to begin the 
major with CSE 120.  Students with little previous 
experience with computer programming who express an 
interest in the computer science major enroll in CSE 110 
Introduction to Computer Programming, a less intensive, 
slower paced course, which gives students time to 
develop the skills and confidence to be successful in 
CSE 120.  Faculty also revamped second and third year 
core courses to address computing skills that were not 
previously covered in the curriculum, thereby ensuring 
that all students had the requisite skills to be successful 
as they moved through the core sequence.     
  
In addition to reworking the curriculum, the culture of the 
CIS department has changed. More opportunities within 
the department to interact with computer science faculty 
play to students’ interests in the applications of 
computer science. One lab period is now set aside to 
give first-year students the opportunity to chat with 
faculty in small groups about research and careers. 
Faculty reach out to students through office hours, 
which are now informal meetings and therefore less 
intimidating and regularly attended by more students. 
The summer research program for undergraduates has 
been expanded and faculty encourage students to 
engage in research projects in the summer after the 
freshman year. Freshmen are assigned a core group of 
faculty advisors with whom they meet for orientation and 
lunch on the first day of the fall semester. The advisors 
also engage new students individually and in small 
groups for informal advising coffees early in the 
semester to become better acquainted with their new 
students. Advising pizza parties to assist students in 
selecting courses for the next semester have become 
popular department events, well-attended by both 
students and faculty. Gatherings such as these held for 
freshmen throughout the year serve to establish a 
community for new students, integrating them early into 
the life of the department.   Building personal 
relationships with faculty encourage students to become 
more engaged with the subject matter and to persist 
with the major. 
 
First-year students gain the advantage of peer 
support through joining a Penn Mentoring group which 
meets weekly throughout the academic year under the 
leadership of upper-class computer science students.  
The mentors leading the all-women’s group realized that 
many of the women studying computer science might be 
grappling with the same issues that faced those in their 
group and in 2003 they organized the Women in 
Computer Science (WICS).  Events hosted by WICS 
provide students with opportunities to discuss 
curriculum with faculty, meet with recruiters from sought 
after companies to prepare for internship and job 
interviews, and make friendships with other students in 
the major.  Other areas on which the computer science 
department has focused include first-year students’ 
interactions with TAs, active learning techniques in TA-
directed labs, and students’ ability to access academic 
mentoring and tutoring support.  Instructional staff 
carefully selects, trains and monitors TAs, and 
introduced paired programming activities and team 
assignments as a part of weekly lab recitations.      
The changes in the computer science curriculum, along 
with a more highly developed community affording 
frequent faculty/student and peer interaction  in the 
computer science department at Penn is credited with 
improving the persistence of first-year women 
undergraduates from 50% in 2003 to 85% in 2005, 
where it has remained, a rate equal to male persistence 
in the major.     
 
9.   Conclusion 
This research study found that many of the study 
participants began the computer science major with an 
inadequate background from high school in the subject, 
causing them to struggle to perform as well as their 
peers with more computer science experience.  
Because of this fact, which was further heightened by 
the women’s perception that the male students knew 
more than they, several women lost confidence in their 
ability to be successful in the major and subsequently 
lost interest in the major.  Social isolation accompanied 
their gender minority status within their peer group 
further weakening their resolve to persist.  However, this 
research also suggests that creating more entry points 
into the major which allow students to begin their 
studies with others at the same level, and creating more 
opportunities for a community to develop which is 
characterized by more frequent interaction for students 
with faculty and peers, could support the retention of 
women in the first year of the major.  This study also 
suggests that the issues that undermine women’s 
persistence may also be undermining that of some male 
students and they may benefit from the same initiative 
designed to support women.   
 
While only 50 percent of first-year women persisted in 
computer science at Penn in 2003, 85 percent of the 
women stayed in computer science in 2005 and in the 
subsequent years, a proportion equal to the persistence 
of first-year male students at Penn.  The sum of the 
effects of these academic and community building 
activities serves to integrate new students early into the 
fabric of department life and to foster confidence early 
on in their computing ability. The current retention data 
at the University of Pennsylvania suggests that this 
approach produces a more satisfied, productive student.    
 
10.   References 
[1]   American Association of University Women.  
(2000).Tech Savvy: Educating Girls in the New 
Computer Age.  American Association of University 
Women Educational Foundation: Washington D.C. 
[2]   Blum, L and C. Friege. (2005). In a More Balanced      
Computer Science Environment, Similarity is the 
Difference and Computer Science is the Winner. 
Computing Research News. 17 (3).  
[3]   College Board Summary Reporting Service 
(College Board). College Bound Seniors: A Profile 
of SAT Program Test Takers. Covering the years 
from 1996-2006. New York: College Board. 
Retrieved on February 25, 2007.  
    [4]  Cohoon, J. McGrath. (1999). Departmental    
Differences Can Point the Way to Improving 
Female Retention in Computer Science. SIGCSE 
Bulletin 31 (1), (pp. 198-202). 
[5]   Cohoon, J. McGrath. (2001). Toward Improving 
        Female Retention in Computer Science. 
       Communications of the ACM. 44 (5), (pp.108-114). 
[6]   Etzkowitz, H. (1994). Who Will Do Science? In   
Educating the Next Generation. W. Pearson and I. 
Fechter, (Eds.) Baltimore: John Hopkins University 
Press.  
[7]   Etzkowitz, H., Kemelgor, C. and Uzzi, B. (2000).    
Athena Unbound: The Advancement of Women in 
Science and Technology. London: Cambridge 
University Press[ 
 [8]   A. Pearl, M. E. Pollack, E. Riskin, B. Thomas, E.                           
Wolf and A. Wu, Becoming a Computer Scientist: 
Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in 
Computer Science, Communications of the 
Association for Computing Machinery, 33(11):48-
57, 1990.  
 [9]   Gurer, D., and T. Camp. (2001). Investigating the 
Incredible Shrinking Pipeline for Women in 
Computer Science. (Final Report-NSF Project 
9812016). 
[10] Margolis, J. & Fisher, A. (2002). Unlocking the 
Clubhouse: Women in Computing. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 
 [11] MIT EECS Committee on Women Undergraduate 
        Enrollment. (1995). Women Undergraduate 
        Enrollment in Electrical Engineering and 
        Computer Science at MIT.  Cambridge, MA: 
        Massachusetts Institute of Technology.http://www-
eecs.mit.edu/AY9495/announcements/13.html.  
[12] Seymour, E., & Hewitt, N. (1997). Talking About 
       Leaving: Why Undergraduates   Leave the 
Sciences.  Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. 
[13] Spertus, E. (1991). Why are There So Few Female 
       Computer Scientists?  (AI Technical Report 1315). 
       Cambridge, MA:, MIT, Artificial Intelligence Lab. 
[14] Strenta, A., et al. (1994). Choosing and Leaving   
Science in Highly Selective Institutions.  Research 
in Higher Education. 35 (5), 13-547. 
