Podcasting Computer Science E-1
Citation
Malan, David J. 2007. Podcasting Computer Science E-1. In SIGCSE 2007: Proceedings of the 
Thirty-Eighth SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, March 7-10, 2007, 
Covington, Kentucky, ed. ACM SIGCSE and Ingrid Russell, 389-393. New York, N.Y.: Association 
for Computing Machinery.
Published Version
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1227310.1227446
Permanent link
http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:2829931
Terms of Use
This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository, and is made available 
under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material, as set forth at http://
nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:dash.current.terms-of-use#LAA
Share Your Story
The Harvard community has made this article openly available.
Please share how this access benefits you.  Submit a story .
Accessibility
Podcasting Computer Science E-1
David J. Malan
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
malan@post.harvard.edu
ABSTRACT
In recent months have teachers become publishers of content
and students subscribers thereof by way of podcasts, feeds of
audio, video, and other content that can be downloaded to
clients like iTunes and devices like iPods. In the fall of 2005,
we ourselves began to podcast Harvard Extension School’s
Computer Science E-1 in both audio and video formats, the
ﬁrst course within Harvard University to do so. Our goals
were to provide students with more portable access to edu-
cational content and to involve them in technology itself.
To evaluate this experiment, we have analyzed logs and
surveys of students. We ﬁnd that our students valued E-1’s
podcast more as a vehicle for review (45%) than as an al-
ternative to attendance (18%). We also ﬁnd that most stu-
dents (71%) tended to listen to or watch lectures on their
computers, with far fewer relying upon audio-only (19%) or
video (10%) iPods. We argue, meanwhile, that podcasting,
despite its widespread popularity, is but a marginal improve-
ment on trends long in progress. It is this technology’s reach
that we claim is signiﬁcant, not the technology itself. Logs
suggest that E-1’s own podcast, available not only to stu-
dents but to the public at large, has acquired (as of Septem-
ber 2006) between 6,000 and 10,000 subscribers from over
50 countries. We argue, then, that podcasting oﬀers to ex-
tend universities’ educational reach more than it oﬀers to
improve education itself.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.3.1 [COMPUTERS AND EDUCATION]: Computer
Uses in Education—Distance learning; K.3.2 [COMPUTERS
AND EDUCATION]: Computer and Information Science
Education—Computer science education
General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors
Keywords
distance education, iPod, iTunes, podcast, podcasting
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
SIGCSE’07, March 7–10, 2007, Covington, Kentucky, USA.
Copyright 2007 ACM 1-59593-361-1/07/0003 ...$5.00.
1.
INTRODUCTION
In the limelight of late is podcasting: distribution of au-
dio, video, and other content via feeds to which one can
subscribe with clients like iTunes [4]. Otherwise known as
podcasts, these feeds enable publishers to push new content
to a subscriber’s computer or mobile device (e.g., iPod [3])
for subsequent playback oﬄine.
In recent months have teachers become publishers and
students subscribers, with lectures themselves the content.
We ourselves set out in the fall term of 2005 to podcast Com-
puter Science E-1: Understanding Computers and the Inter-
net, an introductory course at Harvard Extension School [6]
that, per its syllabus, “[demystiﬁes] computers and the In-
ternet, along with their jargon, so that students understand
not only what they can do with each but also how it all
works and why.” The ﬁrst course within Harvard Univer-
sity to be podcasted in both audio and video formats, E-1’s
lectures were made available not only to registered students
but also to the public at large (at no charge), along with
some sections (i.e., recitations) and workshops led by the
course’s teaching fellows. Our goals were to provide our own
students with more portable means of accessing the course’s
content and to involve them with technology that the course
itself explores.
Not only did we gather statistics on downloads through-
out this experiment, we also surveyed our students for their
thoughts on the technology. We present in this paper the
results of our trial along with details of its implementation.
Along the way, we argue that the value of podcasting in
students’ education has been overstated with hype, noting
instead that this delivery mechanism is but a marginal im-
provement on trends already in progress. We view podcasts
of courses as most valuable for those not even enrolled. In
that podcasts and directories thereof centralize and facilitate
discovery of educational content, podcasting oﬀers universi-
ties new opportunities to teach, sans credits and degrees,
those for whom attendance, enrollment, or education itself
might not otherwise be possible.
We ﬁnd that our own students valued E-1’s podcast more
as a vehicle for review (45%) than as an alternative to at-
tendance (18%).
We also ﬁnd that most of our students
(71%) tended to listen to or watch lectures on their comput-
ers, rather than on audio-only (19%) or video (10%) iPods.
Perhaps most striking, though, is the size of the course’s
unoﬃcial student body: logs suggest that the podcast has
acquired (as of September 2006) between 6,000 and 10,000
subscribers, just over half (62%) from the United States and
the rest from over 50 other countries. We oﬀer these results
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<rss xmlns:itunes="http://www.itunes.com/dtds/podcast-1.0.dtd" version="2.0">
<channel> [...]
<item>
<title>Lecture 1 (video): Hardware</title> [...]
<itunes:author>David J. Malan</itunes:author>
<itunes:summary>Computation. Overview. Bits and bytes. ASCII. Processors. Motherboards: connectors, ports, slots, and
sockets and system bus. Memory: ROM, RAM, level-1 and -2 cache, secondary storage, and virtual memory.</itunes:summary>
<itunes:duration>1:43:43</itunes:duration>
<enclosure url="http://www.courses.dce.harvard.edu/~cscie1/podcasts/lecture1.mov"
type="video/quicktime"
length="210092794" />
<pubDate>Thu, 22 Sep 2005 19:30:00 EST</pubDate>
</item> [...]
</channel>
</rss>
Figure 1: E-1’s podcast is deﬁned by its RSS (i.e., XML) feed, a text ﬁle that describes (and provides URLs to) the
podcast’s actual content. iTunes (like other clients) monitors this ﬁle for changes and relies upon it to generate its
interface (Figure 2).
Students subscribe to the podcast by subscribing to this feed’s URL. This excerpt describes
Lecture 1’s video.
as evidence of podcasting’s potential not necessarily to ed-
ucate better but to educate further.
In the two sections that follow, we elaborate on E-1 and
the implementation of its podcast. In Section 4, we present
the results of our trial.
In Section 5, we oﬀer discussion
thereof. In Section 6, we introduce work that has resulted
from this experience. In Section 7, we conclude.
2.
ABOUT E-1
A gateway to other courses in computer science, E-1 ex-
poses students to material in breadth through lectures on
hardware, software, the Internet, multimedia, security, web-
site development, programming, and more. Though some
students take the course in pursuit of certiﬁcates or degrees
at Harvard Extension School, many enroll for their own ed-
iﬁcation and continuing education. Though the course does
oﬀer hands-on sections and workshops, the course’s lectures
are more conceptual than practical. Per its syllabus, “This
course is all about understanding: understanding what’s go-
ing on inside your computer when you ﬂip on the switch, why
tech support has you constantly rebooting your computer,
how everything you do on the Internet can be watched by
others, and how your computer can become infected with a
worm just by turning it on. . . . Students leave this course
armed with a new vocabulary and equipped for further ex-
ploration of computers and the Internet.”
Since 1999 has E-1 been part of Harvard Extension School’s
Distance Education [7] program, whereby students can take
the course via the Internet. Lectures are ﬁlmed, digitized,
and posted online in RealAudio [9] and RealVideo [10] for-
mats, both of which are synchronized with HTML-based
slideshows of lectures’ slides.
Enrollment each fall hovers around 60 students, up to a
third of whom are typically distant from Cambridge. The
URL of E-1’s website appears in this paper’s appendix.
3.
PODCASTING E-1
To expedite production of the course’s podcast each week,
we simply converted our RealAudio and RealVideo formats
to MP3 [8] and QuickTime [5] formats, respectively. Through
trial and error, we found acceptable middle ground between
ﬁles’ quality and size: we encoded MP3s in monophone at
a sample rate of 22 kilohertz and at a bitrate of 56 kilobits
per second; we encoded QuickTime movies with an MPEG-
4 codec at 30 frames per second, at a resolution of 320×240
pixels, and at a bitrate of 240 kilobits per second.
For
each two-hour lecture, the corresponding MP3 was about
40 megabytes, while the corresponding QuickTime movie
was about 200 megabytes.
We then uploaded these ﬁles (along with PDFs of slides)
each week to a server on campus and updated the podcast’s
RSS (i.e., XML) feed (Figure 1), a text ﬁle that describes
(and provides URLs to) the podcast’s actual content.∗To
“subscribe” to E-1’s podcast, then, is to monitor this feed’s
URL for changes with a client like iTunes, which generates
its interface (Figure 2) based on the feed’s metadata.
In this manner was each lecture made available to students
via iTunes and other clients, usually within 48 hours of its
delivery on campus. The URL of E-1’s podcast (i.e., its RSS
feed) appears in this paper’s appendix.
4.
RESULTS
To evaluate our trial, we turned to logs and students them-
selves. Though our own students’ thoughts on the podcast
proved quite positive, we were struck more by the public’s
response. We present both in turn.
4.1
Students’ Response
At term’s end, we presented students with surveys about
E-1’s podcast. Though students—local and distant alike—
also had access to the course’s lectures in RealAudio and
RealVideo formats, these surveys made clear that questions
only regarded the MP3- and QuickTime-based podcast rather
than distance education itself.
Among the 22 respondents, all but one had utilized the
course’s podcast. The predominant reason was not to avoid
attendance but, rather, to review lectures already attended:
45% valued the podcast as a vehicle for review, whereas
18% valued it as an alternative to attendance. Nonetheless,
we did not detect an 18% (or even noticeable) drop in at-
tendance at lectures vis-`a-vis prior semesters, presumably
because the course already oﬀered distance education.
Nonetheless, some students did express a preference for
the course’s RealVideo format over the podcast’s QuickTime
format, the former of which oﬀered slightly higher resolution
as well as synchronized slides. Other students preferred the
podcast’s portability. One student explained: “I love this
feature, I have an hour to an hour and a half commute each
∗To accommodate the visually impaired, we also oﬀered hyperlinks
to the podcast’s content on the course’s website, whose text is more
easily recited than iTunes’s by accessibility software.
Figure 2: E-1’s podcast was made available to students and the public at large via iTunes and other podcast directories.
Included in the podcast were MP3s and QuickTime movies of lectures (along with PDFs of slides). Also included were
some sections and workshops led by the teaching fellows. Pictured is the interface generated by iTunes based on the
podcast’s RSS feed (Figure 1).
way to work everyday and to have the podcasts helped with
reviewing the lectures (on the go).”
We also surveyed students on the means by which they
tended to listen to or watch the podcast’s content. Most
students (71%) tended to listen to or watch lectures on their
computers, rather than on audio-only (19%) or video (10%)
iPods (Figure 3).
Though worthy of note, this distribu-
tion is not wholly surprising. After all, Harvard Extension
School’s student body is more diverse in age than typical col-
lege classrooms, whose students might be more likely than
ours to own the latest technology. Moreover, E-1’s students
are perhaps, by deﬁnition, less technically savvy than those
who tend to own the same. And, in fairness, the video iPod
was only released toward the start of our trial.
However, this preference for computers over iPods might
also reﬂect disparity between students’ attitudes toward
classes on iPods and actual usage thereof. Our own students’
comments suggest as much: “I really liked [the] concept
of using podcasting as an educational medium. It extends
the reach in very aﬀordable ways. I think I only listened
to one podcast and none of the videos.” In the words of
another, “I have not used [podcasting] once this semester,
either for video or for audio. Though, I absolutely like that
the opportunity to utilize these components exists.”
The
sentiment was not uncommon: “I think podcasting is a good
idea. The more formats information is made available in, the
better. However, I did not listen to any of the podcasts.”
To be sure, sheer novelty explains some students’ enthu-
siasm for the podcast: “I think it was also very much in line
with the course curriculum to have students learn about and
use the technologies that are available, including the iPod.
How very cutting edge we were!” But some students’ takes
on the podcast were more matters of fact: “It’s simply a
good way to review and listen to lectures.”
Needless to say, our own students’ response was ultimately
positive. But the public response was more striking.
4.2
Public Response
In order to make E-1’s podcast available not only to our
own students but also the public at large, we submitted the
URL of its RSS feed to iTunes’s podcast directory at term’s
start as well as to other web-based directories. Thanks, in
part, to those directories as well as to several articles and
blogs that brought attention to the course’s podcast upon
its release, the sizes of E-1’s oﬃcial and unoﬃcial student
bodies ultimately diﬀered by orders of magnitude.
Logs suggest that the podcast has garnered (as of Septem-
ber 2006) between 6,000 and 10,000 subscribers (Figure 4).
Equally striking is the podcast’s reach. Logs suggest that
just over half (62%) of subscribers were from the United
States, with other subscribers scattered across more than
50 other countries (Figure 5).
Even more surprising than these numbers alone are the
dozens of emails that we have received from subscribers.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
computer
audio-only iPod
video iPod
students
Figure 3: At term’s end, we surveyed students on how
they listened to or watched the course’s podcast. Among
the 21 respondents, 15 (71%) tended to listen or watch
on their computers, 4 (19%) tended to listen on audio-
only iPods, and 2 (10%) tended to watch on video iPods.
Many have inquired as to how to enroll in E-1 or other
courses at a distance, evidence that the course’s podcast has
reached corners of the country and world that the school’s
catalogue has not. One subscriber writes: “I am from Vi-
enna, Austria and how can I register [for your] distance
education program? I’m podcasting your course and . . .
[hope to] be a legit [distance-education] student in your class,
thanks a lot for creating [distance education].”
Other subscribers appreciate that the podcast’s content
has reached them at all: “I live in the central interior of
British Columbia, Canada, and am surrounded by forest,
the nearest town is twenty minutes drive. . . . I pay a
great deal of money to connect to the Internet via satellite.
. . . I consider the lessons I have learned from you and
your colleagues to have completely paid for this service.”
Another subscriber writes: “I would like to thank you for
posting your Comp. Sci. E-1 lectures at Harvard University
as podcasts. The commute to Cambridge from the Upper
Galilee in Israel is a bit too much for me to attend the course
in person. Nevertheless, your podcasts have been a great
‘second best.’”
Among those who have emailed us are also other educa-
tors, many of whom ﬁnd the podcast’s content and their own
materials complementary: “My International Baccalaureate
students here . . . in Penzance, UK have all subscribed and
consider it to be an essential tool in their learning already.”
Meanwhile, other subscribers view the podcast not only
as a class but as an opportunity: “I trust that you won’t
mind me saying that we now have the beneﬁt of being tu-
tored by one of the world’s foremost academic institutions
from right here in South Africa.” In the words of another
subscriber, “It is not everyday that someone can be let into
the halls of Harvard U and experience the richness of an Ivy
League experience.”
Other emails embody, quite simply,
gratitude: “Thanks again to you and Harvard for providing
the podcasts.”
To be sure, a podcast about computers and the Internet
perhaps cannot help but be popular among those already
interested in computers and the Internet (i.e., E-1’s sub-
scribers). That over 6,000, though, took an interest in just
one course’s podcast does seem to conﬁrm the technology’s
power to extend schools’ reach well beyond their walls, ivy-
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
lecture4.mov
lecture2.mov
workshop8.mp3
workshop4.mp3
lecture2.mp3
lecture1.mov
lecture4.mp3
lecture3.mp3
lecture1.mp3
promo.mp4
downloads
Figure 4: Logs suggest that E-1’s podcast has had be-
tween 6,000 and 10,000 subscribers. Presented are some
of the podcast’s most popular downloads, with video con-
tent colored in black and audio content colored in gray.
United Kingdom (5%)
Canada (4%)
Japan (3%)
Australia (3%)
Germany (2%)
Other Countries (21%)
United States (62%)
Figure 5: Logs suggest that just over half (62%) of the
subscribers to E-1’s podcast reside in the United States,
with other subscribers scattered across more than 50
other countries.
covered or not. Moreover, that so many subscribers engaged
in a course without promise of credit or degree suggests that
podcasting oﬀers potential not necessarily to educate better
but to educate further. We explore these ideas further in
the section that follows.
5.
DISCUSSION
Podcasting may be new, but cameras in classrooms are
not. For years have universities ﬁlmed some courses’ lectures
so that students can watch recordings thereof if absent from
class or in need of review. What podcasting ultimately oﬀers
are marginal improvements on lectures’ storage and delivery.
The earliest of media for recordings of lectures (e.g., VHS)
oﬀered limited bandwidth: only one student could borrow a
tape at a time. Even before podcasting’s advent had digital
storage and delivery of lectures already begun to supplant
magnetic, thanks, in part, to faster networks and proces-
sors, better codecs, and cheaper storage. As early as 1998
was Harvard College, for instance, streaming some lectures
across campus via Microsoft NetShow. With digital stor-
age and delivery, not only can multiple students now “bor-
row” the same content at once, they can usually watch it
anywhere they have Internet access. Distance education has
further popularized the medium, with videos now commonly
presented alongside other multimedia.
In that it oﬀers oﬄine as opposed to streaming playback,
then, podcasting has simply freed students of the “teth-
ers” of wired and even wireless Internet access. We daresay
that podcasting’s potential for academia has been overstated
with hype: “Could ivy-covered lecture halls become as ob-
solete as the typewriter?” [11] Not likely, we argue.
The
educational value of podcasting as a tool for review seems
clear. The educational value of podcasting as a replacement
for live lectures, we admit, depends on the student, as the
medium might very well be perfect for some students’ styles
of learning. But on the whole, we view classes on iTunes or
iPods as “the next best thing” for students for whom atten-
dance or enrollment is not otherwise possible. What iTunes
and similar podcast directories oﬀer is ease of access to edu-
cational content. Like any good software, they lower a bar.
Insofar as podcasting centralizes and facilitates discovery of
educational content, it oﬀers universities new opportunities
to teach, sans credits and degrees, populations at large. By
no means are all courses suited for the medium. But even a
few dozen courses from a few dozen universities could still
ﬁll a podcast directory.
6.
FUTURE WORK
We plan to podcast E-1 in the fall of 2006 as well. Based
on feedback from students and subscribers, though, we plan
to oﬀer additional content. Striking among 2005’s logs is the
popularity of two of E-1’s workshops (Figure 4). Whereas
E-1’s lectures explore broad categories of topics (e.g., hard-
ware), workshops emphasize individual topics (e.g., digital
photography). The popularity of the latter suggests to us an
interest in more targeted content. Comments from students
on surveys seem to conﬁrm: “I would like the material to
be in [diﬀerent] lengths: a two-minute ‘you really [have] to
know this’ . . . and lectures.” Another student oﬀers: “Per-
haps you should consider including educational podcasts not
just teaching podcasts.”
Not only, then, will we continue to podcast lectures, sec-
tions, and workshops, we also plan to include “videos of the
week,” short segments produced by the teaching fellows on
individual topics relevant to that week’s lecture. Whereas
lectures will remain comprehensive, these “bite-sized” videos
will instead “play to the camera,” oﬀering students more fo-
cused knowledge on demand.
Moreover, this content will be made available not only
via podcast but also via Flash [2]. With Flash reportedly
installed on 97.3% of Internet-enabled desktops [1], we in-
tend for this medium to lower the bar to E-1’s content even
further, particularly for visitors without iTunes or iPods (or
even knowledge thereof).
7.
CONCLUSION
In the fall of 2005, we began to podcast Harvard Exten-
sion School’s Computer Science E-1 in both audio and video
formats, the ﬁrst course within Harvard University to do
so. Our goals were to provide our own students with more
portable access to the course’s content and to involve them
in technology itself.
Through surveys at term’s end, we have found that stu-
dents valued the podcast more as a vehicle for review (45%)
than as an alternative to attendance (18%). We have also
found that most students (71%) tended to listen to or watch
lectures on their computers, with far fewer relying upon
audio-only (19%) or video (10%) iPods. Most striking, how-
ever, is the podcast’s reach. Logs suggest that the podcast
has acquired between 6,000 and 10,000 subscribers from over
50 countries.
Despite the podcast’s popularity, we have argued that
podcasting, as a delivery mechanism, is but a marginal im-
provement on trends long in progress. Moreover, we have
argued that podcasting oﬀers to extend universities’ educa-
tional reach more than it oﬀers to improve education itself.
Not only do we plan to podcast E-1 again in the fall of
2006, we also plan to experiment with alternative forms of
content so as to revisit this work’s questions with additional
data and experience.
APPENDIX
The URL of E-1’s website is
http://www.fas.harvard.edu/∼cscie1/.
The URL of E-1’s podcast (i.e., its RSS feed) is
http://www.fas.harvard.edu/∼cscie1/podcast/.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to E-1’s teaching fellows—Rei Diaz, Dan Ar-
mendariz, and Roman Rubinstein—without whose time and
eﬀort this trial would not have been possible. Many thanks
as well to Elizabeth Hess, Mary Higgins, Chris Mehl, Rod
Lindheim, and Michael Shinagel for their support of this
experiment as well as to Michael D. Smith for his assis-
tance with this work. Many thanks to E-1’s students and
subscribers, without whose interest and thoughts this work
would not have been possible.
And heartfelt thanks to
Henry H. Leitner for all this and more.
REFERENCES
[1] Adobe Systems Incorporated. Flash Player Statistics.
http://www.adobe.com/products/player census/
flashplayer/.
[2] Adobe Systems Incorporated. Flash Professional 8.
http://www.adobe.com/products/flash/flashpro/.
[3] Apple Computer, Inc. iPod Family.
http://www.apple.com/ipod/.
[4] Apple Computer, Inc. iTunes Overview.
http://www.apple.com/itunes/overview/.
[5] Apple Computer, Inc. QuickTime.
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/.
[6] Harvard Extension School.
http://www.extension.harvard.edu/.
[7] Harvard Extension School. Distance Education.
http://www.extension.harvard.edu/DistanceEd/.
[8] Moving Picture Experts Group. ISO/IEC
JTC1/SC29/WG11. http://www.chiariglione.org/
mpeg/standards/mpeg-1/mpeg-1.htm.
[9] RealNetworks, Inc. RealAudio.
http://www.realnetworks.com/products/codecs/
realaudio.html.
[10] RealNetworks, Inc. RealVideo.
http://www.realnetworks.com/products/codecs/
realvideo.html.
[11] Peg Tyre. Professor in Your Pocket. Newsweek, pages
46–47, November 28, 2005.
