Springer-Verlag London Ltd. 2004
Knowledge and Information Systems (2004) 6: 664–678
DOI 10.1007/s10115-003-0128-3
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph
of the Computer Science Literature
Yuan An1, Jeannette Janssen2, Evangelos E. Milios3
1Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University
3Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University
Abstract. Citation graphs representing a body of scientiﬁc literature convey measures of schol-
arly activity and productivity. In this work we present a study of the structure of the citation
graph of the computer science literature. Using a web robot we built several topic-speciﬁc ci-
tation graphs and their union graph from the digital library ResearchIndex. After verifying that
the degree distributions follow a power law, we applied a series of graph theoretical algorithms
to elicit an aggregate picture of the citation graph in terms of its connectivity. We discovered
the existence of a single large weakly-connected and a single large biconnected component, and
conﬁrmed the expected lack of a large strongly-connected component. The large components re-
mained even after removing the strongest authority nodes or the strongest hub nodes, indicating
that such tight connectivity is widespread and does not depend on a small subset of important
nodes. Finally, minimum cuts between authority papers of different areas did not result in a bal-
anced partitioning of the graph into areas, pointing to the need for more sophisticated algorithms
for clustering the graph.
Keywords: Citation graph; Graph connectivity; Networked information spaces; Power law;
Small worlds
1. Introduction
A body of scientiﬁc literature can be seen as a networked information space, a col-
lection of information entities connected by a link structure. Here the information
entities are the scientiﬁc papers, and they are linked together by citation relations.
The link structure of this networked information space can be represented by a dir-
ected graph, which is commonly referred to as the citation graph. Each node of
the citation graph represents a paper, and a directed link from one node to another
Received 7 November 2001
Revised 2 January 2003
Accepted 26 February 2003
Published online 6 February 2004
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
665
implies that the paper associated with the ﬁrst node cites the paper associated with
the second node.
Citation graphs representing scientiﬁc papers contain valuable information about
levels of scholarly activity and provide measures of academic productivity. A citation
graph has the potential to reveal interesting information about a particular scholarly
research topic: it may be possible to infer research areas and their evolution over
time, measure relations between research areas and trace the inﬂuence of ideas that
appear in the literature.
As a ﬁrst step in this direction, we investigate in this article a citation graph in
a manner similar to the investigations carried out on the World Wide Web. Our study
was carried out in three stages. First, we conﬁrm that the in-degree distribution of
our citation graphs follows a power law distribution, as discovered by other studies of
the citation structure of the science literature, and by studies of the World Wide Web.
Second, we investigate the connectivity properties of the citation graph by applying
a series of graph theoretic algorithms to compute the weakly connected components,
strongly connected components and biconnected components. An understanding of
the connectivity properties of the citation graph is a prerequisite for addressing the
problem of clustering the citation graph into subject areas. It also parallels similar
studies on the World Wide Web. Third, we attempt to separate the citation graph into
subject areas. To this end, we compute the global minimum cut, and the minimum
cuts separating authority papers in different areas. We also compute the shortest paths
between pairs of papers. An aggregate picture of the citation graph in terms of its
connectivity emerges out of the results. This picture points out that the citation graph
is tightly connected, and ﬁnding communities is a non-trivial problem.
To build citation graphs for our experimental investigations, we implemented
a web robot to query the online computer science library ResearchIndex. We built
the citation graph around three different areas within computer science: Neural Net-
works, Software Engineering and Automata. The areas were chosen to be distinct
from each other, and to contain one area (Neural Networks) familiar to the authors.
Although there is no theoretical guarantee that the topics chosen are representative of
the big picture, we found that the union graph of the three areas and the individual
area graphs show remarkably similar behaviour under all the connectivity tests that
we conducted.
The following considerations motivated our study. Understanding the link top-
ology of the citation graph using graph-theoretic tools may:
1. facilitate knowledge discovery relying on link information such as similarity cal-
culation, and ﬁnding communities.
2. help in citation graph visualization.
3. help evaluate the evolution of specialities or research themes over time.
1.1. Main Results
We performed three sets of experiments on our collection of citation graphs obtained
from different research areas. The main result of our analysis was that these citation
graphs showed remarkably similar behaviour in each of our experiments. Moreover,
the results of the experiments performed on the union of the three graphs were again
similar to that of each of its parts, indicating the self-similarity of the citation graph.
We ﬁrst constructed a robot for querying ResearchIndex (Lawrence, Bollacker,
and Giles 2001), and using the robot we built a collection of three local citation
666
Y. An et al.
Fig. 1. The connectivity of the citation graph: 68.5% of the nodes have no incoming link.
Fig. 2. The connectivity of the citation graph: 58% of the nodes in the giant Weakly Connected Compon-
ent(WCC) account for a big Biconnected Component(BCC).
graphs by starting with papers from three different topics. We also merged the three
graphs into the union graph: the combined citation graph of the three individual ones.
Papers whose full text (including references) were not available on ResearchIndex
were not included in the citation graph. This is an assumption we made to simplify
graph analysis. Otherwise we would have to consider two distinct categories of nodes,
thus severely complicating the analysis. This limitation is not unique to ResearchIn-
dex and our graphs, it is inherent in any citation index. We informally examined the
Science Citation Index(SCI), and we found a similar proportion of papers published
in venues not indexed there.
The ﬁrst set of experiments computed the in-degree distributions and conﬁrmed
previous studies (Redner 1998) demonstrating that they follow a power law. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the fraction of articles with k citations is proportional to 1/ke, where the
exponent e is close to 1.7 for each of the four graphs.
The second set of experiments investigated the connectivity of the citation graph.
It was found that approximately 90% of the nodes form a single Weakly Connected
Component(WCC) if citations are treated as undirected edges. Within this giant
WCC, almost 68.5% of the nodes have no incoming link, suggesting that 68.5%
of the publications in the giant WCC have not been cited (yet). See Fig. 1 for
a representation of this result. Furthermore, within the giant WCC, around 58% of
its publications form a large Biconnected Component(BCC), and almost all the re-
maining nodes of the giant WCC fall into trivial BCCs, each of which consists of
a single distinct node. The aggregate picture that emerges is shown in Fig. 2.
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
667
The third set of experiments applied the Minimum cut Maximum ﬂow algorithm
for ﬁnding cluster information. The results indicated that we need more sophisticated
tools for the clustering problem in the citation graph.
1.2. Related Work
Research in bibliometrics has long been concerned with the use of citations to pro-
duce quantitative estimates of the importance and impact of individual scientiﬁc pub-
lication and journals. The best-known measure in this ﬁeld is Garﬁeld’s impact fac-
tor (Garﬁeld 1972). The impact factor is a ranking scheme based fundamentally on
a pure counting of the in-degree of nodes in the citation graph. Redner (Redner 1998)
has focused on the statistical distribution of the number of citations of the scientiﬁc
literature. Chen (Chen 1999; Chen 2001) developed a set of methods that extends
and transforms traditional author co-citation analysis by heuristically extracting struc-
tural patterns from scientiﬁc literature for visualization as a 3D virtual map. As to
structural analysis of large scale networks, Broder et al. (Broder, Kumar, Maghoul,
Raghavan, Rajagopalan, Stata, Tomkins, and Wiener 2000) studied various properties
of Web graph including its diameter, degree distributions, connected components, and
macroscopic structure, proposing a bow tie model of the Web. Earlier work, explor-
ing the scaling properties of the Web graph, has been done by Barabasi (Barabasi
and Albert 1999). Exploiting the link topology of large-scale networks for informa-
tion discovery has been recently proposed for the Web (Chakrabarti, Dom, Gibson,
Kleinberg, Kumar, Raghavan, Rajagopalan, and Tomkins 1999). This work starts with
a query and the response set of an index-based search engine to it, which is viewed
as the “root” set. The base set consists of all the pages that link to or are linked from
the root set (excluding links within the same domain). Finally, authorities and hubs
are computed in the root set, and the pages with highest authority and hub values
are returned. In a related project, the authors attempt to identify communities by
enumerating complete directed bipartite subgraphs of the Web, and then expanding
them through treating them as the root set in the previous algorithm.
2. Measurements on the Citation Graph
The ﬁrst step is to extract citation graphs from a citation database. ResearchIn-
dex (Lawrence, Bollacker, and Giles 2001) is a Web-based digital library and cita-
tion database of computer science literature and provides us easy access to citation
information for our study. We constructed a Web robot for querying ResearchIn-
dex autonomously. We chose three areas within computer science as starting points:
Neural Networks, Automata and Software Engineering.
Our procedure for creating the citation graphs started from a base set, obtained
via keyword search, containing thousands of nodes that are not necessarily connected.
We then expanded this base set by following incoming links and outgoing links of
the nodes in the base set. The crawling process was terminated when space and time
limitations were reached. About 100,000 papers were parsed for each topic. A meas-
ure of topic drifting could be a more plausible stopping criterion. However, this was
not an option in our study, as we did not have access to the text of the articles.
Therefore we should treat the titles of the three subgraphs we constructed (Neural
Networks, Software Engineering and Automata) with an awareness that they repre-
sent three graphs built with these topics as starting points, and there is no guarantee
668
Y. An et al.
Fig. 3. The in-degree distribution in the union citation graph in computer science literature subscribes to the
power law with exponent = 1.71.
that their contents fully cover or are restricted only to these areas. It is reasonable
to expect, however, that the process led to a union graph that includes several areas.
Deﬁning the areas is in itself a problem that depends on the judgment of experts and
is difﬁcult to deﬁne formally. Examining the topical cohesion of scientiﬁc document
collections is beyond the scope of this article, and it is a direction we are currently
pursuing. A study of the full citation graph would be more interesting, as setting
a ﬁxed size for stopping the search may not fully capture a topic, if it is larger than
the size explored, or it may drift into other topics.
The above process leads to the formation of three raw citation graphs and their
union graph. We note that there are two types of articles in the raw citation graphs:
the ﬁrst type of article is fully available in ResearchIndex, including its full text and
references; the second type of article is brought into ResearchIndex by a reference of
other papers, but its text and references are not in ResearchIndex. The second type
only contributes part of the information to the citation graph. In the experiments
reported in this article, the citation graphs used were obtained from the raw citation
graphs by removing all articles of the second type. The measurements we extracted
from the citation graphs we built included in- and out-degree distributions (involving
only the articles in the citation graphs, which are a subset of the citing and cited
articles respectively) and diameters.
2.1. Degree Distributions
We begin by considering the in-degrees of nodes in the citation graph. We observed
that the in-degree distributions follow a power law; i.e., the fraction of papers with
in-degree i is proportional to 1/iγ for some γ > 1. Our experiments on all citation
graphs built from the different topics as well as the union citation graph conﬁrmed
this result at a variety of scales. In all these experiments, the value of the exponent γ
in the power law for in-degrees is a remarkably consistent 1.7.
Figure 3 is a log-log plot of the binned in-degree distribution of the union citation
graph for extracting the exponent γ. The value γ = 1.71 is derived from the slope
of the line providing the best linear ﬁt to the data in the ﬁgure.
The out-degree distribution in the union citation graph follows a more complex
distribution, shown in Fig. 4. It peaks at 16, and after 18 it follows a power law
distribution with exponent 2.32. This outcome is not surprising, as there are very
few papers, typically tutorial in nature, with a large number of references, while
the majority of the papers have references in the range of 20 to 50. It should be
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
669
Fig. 4. The out-degree distribution in the union citation graph.
noted that the out-degree of a paper in our citation graph is less than its number
of references, since we only include in the citation graph the papers that are fully
available in the ResearchIndex database. This affects older papers more, since their
references are less likely to be available in electronic form.
2.2. Diameter
We turn next to the diameter measurement of citation graphs. In this study, the
diameter is deﬁned as the maximum shortest path between any pair of nodes in the
graph. More formally, the diameter is the maximum over all ordered pairs (u, v) of
the length of the shortest path from u to v in the citation graph, where u and v
are nodes of the graph. We measured two types of diameter for the citation graph:
directed diameter and undirected diameter. Directed diameter is measured by the
directed shortest path or dipath, while undirected diameter is obtained by the shortest
path when treating edges as undirected.
Before we measured diameters, we tested the connectivity of the citation graph
as an undirected graph. The results revealed that the citation graph is not connected.
This means that there are nodes which cannot be reached by a path from other nodes,
implying that the diameter is inﬁnite. However, the tests also revealed that ≈80%–
90% of the nodes are in one giant connected component, while the rest form a few
very small components. Details are described in Sect. 3. We therefore considered
the diameter of this giant connected component as the undirected diameter of the
graph.
The diameters obtained by applying Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm on the giant
connected components of the citation graphs built for the three topics and their union
are shown in Table 1.
We observe that the citation graph, if we ignore the direction of edges, is a ‘small
world’ (in a sense similar to (Watts and Strogatz 1998)) with an undirected diameter
of around 18. The result is consistent at a variety of scales and topics.
A completely different picture emerges when we consider the directed citation
graph. Our statistical study shows that the probability of having a directed path be-
tween any pair of nodes is only 2%. The directed diameter was calculated by taking
the maximum only over those pairs of nodes that are connected by a directed path.
This diameter turned out to be around 30 (see Table 1). We attribute the lack of con-
nectivity to the temporal nature of the citation graph. In almost all cases, references
670
Y. An et al.
Table 1. The diameters of citation graphs built from different topics as well as union citation graph. Topic:
N.N.: Neural Networks, S.E.: Software Engineering.
graph
directed
undirected
size
diameter
diameter
citation graph–N.N.
23,371
24
18
citation graph–Automata
28,168
33
19
citation graph–S.E.
19,018
22
16
union citation graph
57,239
37
19
average
29
18
can only be made to papers that appeared previously, and therefore directed cycles
are unlikely. (Some directed cycles arise in special circumstances, see Sect. 3.2)
3. Reachability and Connected Components
We now consider the connectivity of our citation graphs of computer science liter-
ature. This involves examining the various types of its connected components and
reachability of nodes. Given a citation graph G = (V, E), we will view G both as
a directed graph as well as an undirected graph (the latter by ignoring the direc-
tion of all edges). We now ask how well connected the citation graph is. We apply
a set of algorithms that compute reachability information and structural information
of directed and undirected citation graphs: Weakly Connected Components(WCC),
Strongly Connected Components(SCC) and Biconnected Components(BCC).
3.1. Weakly Connected Components
Mathematically, a Weakly Connected Component(WCC) of an undirected graph G =
(V, E) is a maximal connected subgraph of G. A WCC of a citation graph is a maxi-
mal set of articles each of which is reachable from any other if links may be followed
either forwards or backwards. In the context of a citation graph, links stand for the
citations from one article to other articles cited in the former one. The WCC struc-
ture of a citation graph gives us an aggregate picture of groups of articles that are
loosely related to each other.
The results drawn from the weakly connected component experiments on cita-
tion graphs are shown in Table 2. The results reveal that the citation graph is well
connected–a signiﬁcant constant fraction ≈80%–90% of all nodes fall into one giant
connected component. It is remarkable that the same general results on connectivity
are observed in each of the three topic subgraphs. In turn, the same behaviour is
observed for the union graph, suggesting a certain degree of self-similarity.
3.2. Strongly Connected Components
We turn next to the extraction of the Strongly Connected Component(SCC) of the
connected components of the three topical citation graphs and their union graph.
A Strongly Connected Component(SCC) of a directed graph is a maximal subgraph
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
671
Table 2. The results of Weakly Connected Component experiments on different citation graphs: the majority
(≈90%) of articles are connected to each other if links are treated as without directions.citation graph: N.N.
stands for Neural Networks; S.E. stands for Software Engineering.
graph
size of largest
percentage of
size of second
size
WCC
largest WCC
largest WCC
citation graph–N.N.
23,371
18,603
79.6%
21
citation graph–Automata
28,168
25,922
92%
20
citation graph–S.E.
19,018
16,723
87.9%
12
union citation graph
57,239
50,228
87.8%
21
Table 3. The results of Strongly Connected Component experiments on different citation graphs: there exist
many small SCCs, among them there are three bigger SCC(s), the rest are even smaller comparing those
bigger ones. citation graph: N.N. stands for Neural Networks; S.E. stands for Software Engineering.
graph
size of largest
size of second
size of third
size
SCC
largest SCC
largest SCC
citation graph–N.N.
18,603
144
14
10
citation graph–Automata
25,922
192
29
24
citation graph–S.E.
16,723
17
11
8
union citation graph
50,228
239
155
60
such that for all pairs of vertices (u, v) of the subgraph, there exists a directed path
(dipath) from u to v. In the context of the citation graph, a dipath from u to v means
that article u directly cites article v or article u cites an intermediate article w, w cites
the next intermediate article and so on, until it reaches article v indirectly. Since there
is a temporal direction between citing article and cited article, if article u directly
or indirectly cites article v, then v would not cite back to u. As a result, we might
expect that there is no SCC in the citation graph. But contrary to our expectation,
the results of SCC experiments on the collection of citation graphs reveal that there
exist three sizable SCCs in each of the citation graphs, as well as a few very small
SCCs. The results drawn from the experiments are shown in Table 3.
In order to know which publications formed the SCCs, i.e., how the directed
cycles were generated in those citation graphs, we extracted some SCCs from cita-
tion graphs and searched articles of these SCCs directly in ResearchIndex’s database
to ﬁnd their titles, abstracts, authors, journals and published years. Our study shows
that several types of publications formed SCCs: (1) publications written by the same
authors tend to cite each other, they usually produce self-citations, (2) publications
which are tightly relevant tend to cite each other, e.g., publications, whose authors
are in the same institute, dealing with the same speciality and getting published
concurrently are highly relevant and tend to cite each other, (3) publications which
were published in several different forms, such as journals, conference proceedings or
technical reports, at different times often formed directed cycles with other publica-
tions. The different forms of the publication were considered as one node during our
creation process of the citation graphs. (4) books or other publications which were
published in several editions at different times, where the newer editions contained
more recent references, often acted as jump points in the citation graph. The jump
points formed by publications of type (4) caused large directed cycles in the citation
672
Y. An et al.
Fig. 5. The directed connectivity of a citation graph: a number of small SCCs embedded in a background
net; the background net is a directed acyclic graph.
graph; this is the reason for the existence of three bigger SCCs. Types (1)–(3) of
articles usually gave rise only to small SCCs containing 2–5 articles.
A conceptual map arising from the analysis of the results of the SCC experiment
on the union citation graph is depicted in Fig. 5. A number of small SCCs are
embedded in a well connected background net. This background net is a directed
acyclic structure, i.e., there is no directed cycle in the background net.
3.3. Biconnected Components
We now turn to a stronger notion of connectivity in the undirected view of the cita-
tion graph, that of biconnectivity. A Biconnected Component(BCC) of an undirected
graph is a maximal subgraph such that every pair of vertices is biconnected. Two ver-
tices u and v are biconnected if there are at least two disjoint paths between u and v,
or, equivalently, if u and v lie on a common cycle. Any biconnected component must
therefore lie within a weakly connected component. Applying the biconnected com-
ponent algorithm on the giant connected components of citation graphs, we ﬁnd that
each giant connected component of each citation graph contains a giant biconnected
component. The giant BCC acts as a central biconnected nucleus, with small BCCs
connected to this nucleus by cut vertices, and other single trivial nodes connected
to the nucleus or a small BCC.
The numerical analysis of sizes of BCCs indicated that ≈58% of all nodes
account for the giant biconnected nucleus, the rest ≈40% of the nodes are in trivial
BCCs each of which consists of single distinct node, and the remaining ≈2% of
the nodes fall into a few small BCCs.
3.4. Aggregate Picture
From the application of algorithms to detect connected components, an aggregate
picture of the citation graph as an undirected graph emerged. First of all, the citation
graph is not, in general, connected. This can be explained in the context of our
construction of the citation graphs: we started building each citation graph from
a base set containing a number of documents which are not necessarily connected,
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
673
Table 4. Sizes of the largest Weakly Connected Components(WCCs) when nodes with in-degree at least k
are removed from the giant connected component of union citation graph.
size of graph
50,228
k
200
150
100
50
10
5
4
3
size of graph
50,222
50,215
50,152
49,775
46,850
43,962
42,969
41,246
after removing
size of largest
50,107
49,990
48,973
43,073
26,098
14,677
9,963
1,140
WCC
Table 5. Sizes of the largest Weakly Connected Components(WCCs) when nodes with out-degree at least k
are removed from the giant connected component of union citation graph.
size of graph
50,228
k
200
150
100
50
10
5
4
3
size of graph
50,225
50,225
50,224
50,205
48,061
43,964
42,238
39,622
after removing
size of largest
50,202
50,202
50,198
50,131
46,092
37,556
33,279
26,489
WCC
and while the expansion of the base set serves to connect many of these documents,
others remain in small isolated components. Moreover, our cleaning up process of
removing those articles whose text and references are not available, produced more
isolated components. Secondly, the results of the WCC experiment indicate that ≈
90% of the nodes form a giant weakly connected component. The single giant WCC
can be divided into two parts: one part contains almost 68.5% of the nodes without
any incoming link, suggesting that 68.5% of publications have not been cited yet,
another part contains the rest of publications with at least one citation. Finally, in
the giant WCC, around 58% of nodes form a big Biconnected Component(BCC) and
act as a biconnected nucleus, with a few small BCCs connected to this nucleus by
cut vertices, and all the rest of nodes fall into trivial BCCs each of which consists
of a single distinct node connected to this nucleus or some other small pieces. The
aggregate picture is shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
4. Does Connectivity Depend on Some Key Articles?
We have observed that the citation graph is well connected – 90% of the nodes form
a giant connected component which in turn contains a biconnected nucleus with 58%
of all nodes. The result that the in- distributions follow a power law indicates that
there are a few nodes of large in-degree. Moreover, our analysis of the out-degrees
implies that there are also some nodes with large out-degree. We are interested in
determining whether the widespread connectivity of the citation graph results from
a few nodes of large in-degree acting as “authorities” or a few nodes of large out-
degree acting as “hubs”. We test this connectivity by removing those nodes with
large in-degree or out-degree, and computing again the size of the largest WCC.
The results are shown in Tables 4 and 5.
These results show that the widespread connectivity does not depend on either
hubs or authority papers. Indeed, even if all links to nodes with in-degree 5 or
674
Y. An et al.
higher are removed (certainly including links to every well-known article on com-
puter science), the graph still contains a giant Weakly Connected Component(WCC).
Similarly, if all links to nodes with out-degree 3 or higher are removed, the graph
is still well connected. We conclude that the connectivity of the citation graph is
extremely resilient and is not due to the existence of hubs and authorities, which
are embedded in a graph that is well connected without their contributions. A topic
for further research is to conduct a more thorough investigation of the connectivity
properties (for example average in-degree) of the graphs resulting from the removal
of hub/authority or non-hub/non-authority nodes.
5. Minimum Cuts
A question related to understanding the structure of the citation graph is that of
ﬁnding thematically cohesive communities. So far, our study of various types of
connected components has resulted in a well-connected citation graph with a gi-
ant biconnected nucleus. The next question is whether there is any further structure
within this nucleus. We attack this problem using minimum cut algorithms, both for
global minimum cut and for minimum cuts between speciﬁc pairs of nodes.
Mathematically, an (edge) cut C of graph H = (V, E) is a set of edges which,
when removed, disconnect the graph. The size of a cut is the number of edges in
the cut. Given an edge weight function w : E →R, a minimum cut is a cut whose
total weight is minimum.
Our min-cut experiments focus on the giant connected component of union ci-
tation graph. After extracting the giant connected component H = (V, E) from the
union citation graph, we assign edge weight w(e) = 1 for all e ∈E, and then apply
the global minimum cut algorithm on H. In order to explore the interior structure
of graph H, we implemented the min-cut exploratory procedure as follows:
1. procedure Explore_Min_Cut (H = (V, E))
2.
while |H| > 0
3.
compute min-cut C of H;
4.
calculate edge weight over crossing edge set F;
5.
let H1 = (C, E1) be graph induced by C;
6.
let H2 = (V −C, E2) be graph induced by V −C;
7.
Explore_Min_Cut(H1);
8.
Explore_Min_Cut(H2);
9.
end while;
Most of the resulting cuts found by the above procedure are trivial cuts, each of
which separates only one node from the rest of the graph.
When the procedure Explore_Min_Cut(H) is applied to graph H recursively until
the fragments become trivially small, we ﬁnd that 99% of the cuts are trivial.
From these experiments we conclude that the interior link structure of the cita-
tion graph is dense; There is no explicit community information discernible through
global minimum cuts. We conclude that we need more sophisticated tools for ﬁnding
communities in citation graph.
Since the global minimum cut approach does not give us communities, we turn to
the computation of minimum cuts between speciﬁc nodes. If two nodes are selected
to belong to different topics, then possibly the minimum cut between them might
separate the papers belonging to the two topics. To investigate this hypothesis we
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
675
selected authority papers (papers with large in-degree) belonging to the topics of
Neural Networks, Automata and Software Engineering, and computed the minimum
cuts of the union graph between pairs of authority papers. For the minimum cut
computation, we made two modiﬁcations to the (directed) union graph of 50,228
nodes:
1. We added the reverse edges to all the edges of the graph, so as to effectively
treat it as an undirected graph.
2. We added node capacities equal to 1, by the following construction. We replace
each node v by two nodes vin and vout and an edge from vin to vout, and we
connect all the edges into v to vin and all the edges out of v to vout. All edges
have capacity 1, thus allowing us to associate capacities 1 to all the nodes, as
well.
The resulting graph has 100,456 nodes.
From these experiments we obtain highly unbalanced partitions of the union
graph. The cut sizes are similar to the in-degree of the nodes, and the smaller par-
tition contains at most a few hundred nodes while the larger partition contains the
rest of the nodes (approximately 99,000).
These results further conﬁrm the high overall connectivity of the citation graph.
Generally, the number of different paths between the source and sink papers is much
higher than the degree of these papers. This effect is much more prominent than the
difference in connectivity in the interior and the exterior of a community of nodes
corresponding to one subject area, which was the property we hoped to exploit.
In future work, the minimum cut method should be biased towards more balanced
cuts, to avoid the highly unbalanced partitions that we obtain with the unmitigated
method (Even, Naor, Rao, and Schieber 1999).
6. Conclusion
The Citation Graph of Computer Science is a directed graph whose nodes are articles
and whose edges are references that appear in the node of origin. The citation graph
can potentially be used in a variety of ways, for example to infer research areas and
their evolution over time, measure relations between research areas, and trace the
inﬂuence of ideas that appear in the literature. In this article, we reported the re-
sults of examining the citation graph with graph theoretic algorithms. We constructed
a web robot querying the computer science digital library ResearchIndex and built
the citation graph for three different areas within computer science. We veriﬁed that
the in-degree distribution follows the power law, and we applied a series of graph
theoretic algorithms. We extracted Weakly Connected Components, Strongly Con-
nected Components, Biconnected Components, and we computed Global Minimum
Cut, Minimum cuts between authority papers in different areas, and shortest paths
between pairs of papers. Based on the results, we elicit an aggregate picture of the
citation graph in terms of its connectivity. Our attempts to extract research communi-
ties with the above standard graph theoretic algorithms and no further heuristics were
not successful. The citation graph retained a large well-connected component, point-
ing to the need for the application of more sophisticated balanced graph partitioning
algorithms. It should be pointed out that the balanced graph partitioning problem
is NP-hard (Garey, Johnson, and Stockmeyer 1976), but local search strategies have
been proposed for them (Kernighan and Lin 1970; Fiduccia and Mattheyses 1982).
676
Y. An et al.
Our results suggest that the citation graph shares the same self-similarity (or
fractal) properties as the World Wide Web (Dill, Kumar, McCurley, Rajagopalan,
Sivakumar and Tomkins 2001). This implies that our conclusions are likely to be
applicable to the entire citation graph.
A number of interesting further directions of research are suggested by our study.
A major open question is how to autonomously partition the citation graph into com-
munities. Our intuition and experience tells us that papers on a speciﬁc research topic
must be more densely interconnected than random groups of papers. Hence research
topics or “communities” should correspond to locally dense structures in the cita-
tion graph. However, our work shows that the connectivity of citation graphs as
a whole is such that it is not possible to extract such communities with straight-
forward methods such as minimum cut. More sophisticated methods, and a precise
deﬁnition of a community in graph-theoretic terms, are needed if we wish to suc-
ceed in mining the community information encoded in the link structure of a citation
graph or other networked information space.
Fundamental questions about the temporal evolution of the citation graph should
be addressed. A study of the temporal evolution of the local link structure of citation
graphs can be used for predicting research trends or for studying the life span of
specialties and communities. Dynamic models for the citation graph could be de-
veloped based on such a study, and such models can, in turn, serve as a tool for
prediction and experimentation.
The issue of topic drifting that is present in the citation graphs we extracted
needs to be addressed by building a framework that permits the investigation to be
carried out on the full citation graph.
A last suggestion for further research is the use of insight about the citation graph
to develop tools for better navigation, mining and retrieval in networked information
spaces, such as the World Wide Web or corporate intranets.
About the authors
Yuan An completed his Master’s in the Faculty of Computer Science of Dalhousie
University, and he is pursuing his Ph.D. in the Department of Computer Science,
University of Toronto. He can be reached by e-mail yuana@cs.toronto.edu.
Jeannette Janssen is a member of the faculty of the Department of Mathematics
and Statistics, Dalhousie University. Her current research interests are Combinato-
rial Optimization, Graph Colouring, Frequency Assignment. She can be reached by
e-mail janssen@mscs.dal.ca.
Evangelos E. Milios is a member of faculty and Director of the Graduate Program of
the Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University. His current research activity
is centred on Software agents for Web information retrieval. He can be reached by
e-mail eem@cs.dal.ca.
References
Barabasi A-L, Albert R (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286:509–512
Broder AZ, Kumar SR, Maghoul F, Raghavan P, Rajagopalan S, Stata R, Tomkins A, Wiener J (2000) Graph
structure in the web: experiments and models. In Proc 9th WWW Conf, pp 309–320
Characterizing and Mining the Citation Graph of the Computer Science Literature
677
Chakrabarti S, Dom BE, Gibson D, Kleinberg J, Kumar R, Raghavan P, Rajagopalan S, Tomkins A (1999)
Mining the link structure of the World Wide Web. IEEE Comput 32:60–67
Chen C (1999) Visualising semantic spaces and author co-citation networks in digital libraries. Inf Proc
Manage 35:401–420
Chen C (2001) Visualising a knowledge domain’s intellectual structure. IEEE Comput 34:65–71
Dill S, Kumar R, McCurley K, Rajagopalan S, Sivakumar D, Tomkins A (2001) Self-similarity in the web.
In 27th Int Conf on Very Large Databases (VLDB2001)
Even G, Naor J, Rao S, Schieber B (1999) Fast approximate graph partitioning algorithms. SIAM J COMPUT.
Soc Ind Appl Math 28(6):2187–2214
Fiduccia CM, Mattheyses RM (1982) A linear-time heuristic for improving network partitions. In Proc of
the 19th IEEE Des Automation Conf, pp 175–181
Garey M, Johnson D, Stockmeyer L (1976) Some simpliﬁed NP-complete graph problems. Theor Comput
Sci 1:237–267
Garﬁeld E (1972) Citation analysis as a tool in journal evaluation. Science 178:471–479
Kernighan BW, Lin S (1970) An efﬁcient heuristic procedure for partitioning graphs. The Bell Syst Tech J
29(2):291–307
Lawrence S, Bollacker K, Giles CL (2001) ResearchIndex. NEC Research Institute, http://citeseer.nj.nec.com
(accessed on Sep 30, 2001)
Redner S (1998) How popular is your paper? An empirical study of the citation distribution. Euro Phys J B
4:131–134
Watts D, Strogatz S (1998) Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature 393:440–442
Author Biographies
Yuan An is currently a Ph.D. student in the Department of Computer Science
at the University of Toronto working with Prof. John Mylopoulos. He obtained
his Master’s degree in Computer Science from Dalhousie University, Canada,
under the supervision of Prof. Evangelos Milios and Prof. Jeannette Janssen.
He holds M. Eng. and B. Eng. degrees from Tsinghua University, China. His
research interests include Knowledge Discovery and Management for large
and heterogeneous data sets, Conceptual Modelling, and Database techniques
on the Web. His current research is on Semantic Encapsulation on supporting
Model Interoperation.
Jeannette Janssen’s research area is applied graph theory. She has worked
on the problem of frequency assignment in cellular and digital broadcasting
networks. Her current interest is in graph theory applied to the World Wide
Web and other networked information spaces. Dr. Janssen did her Master’s
studies at Eindhoven University of Technology in the Netherlands, and her
doctorate at Lehigh University, USA. She is currently an associate professor
at Dalhousie University, Canada.
678
Y. An et al.
Evangelos Milios received a diploma in Electrical Engineering from the Na-
tional Technical University of Athens, and Master’s and Ph.D. degrees in Elec-
trical Engineering and Computer Science from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. He held faculty positions at the University of Toronto and York
University. He is currently a Professor of Computer Science at Dalhousie Uni-
versity, Canada, where he was Director of the Graduate Program. He has served
on the committees of the ACM Dissertation Award, and the AAAI/SIGART
Doctoral Consortium. He has worked on the interpretation of visual and range
signals for landmark-based positioning, navigation and map construction in
single- and multiagent robotics. His current research activity is centred on Net-
worked Information Spaces, Web information retrieval, and aquatic robotics.
He is a Senior Member of the IEEE.
Correspondence and offprint requests to: Evangelos E. Milios, Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie Uni-
versity, 6050 University Avenue, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 1W5, Canada. Email: eem@cs.dal.ca
