Undergraduate Computer Science Education in China 
Ming Zhang 
School of Electronics Engineering 
and Computer Science 
Peking University 
mzhang@net.pku.edu.cn
Virginia M. Lo* 
Department of Computer 
and Information Science 
University of Oregon 
lo@cs.uoregon.edu  
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper examines the current status of professional computing 
education for undergraduate majors and fundamental computer 
education for non-majors in China.  We describe the evolution of 
computing education over the past decade and its role in meeting 
society’s requirements for IT talent, and we discuss developing 
trends for computing education at China’s universities.  We 
conclude with a description of the Computer Science major at 
Peking University, one of the nation’s leading research-based 
computer science departments.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
K.3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer science education, 
curriculum. 
General Terms 
Design, Management, Standardization 
Keywords 
Computer science education, China, Peking University, School of 
Electronics Engineering and Computer Science 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the 21st century, information technology has permeated every 
sector of life in China. The capabilities of collecting, presenting, 
storing, transferring, processing, controlling, and applying 
information are fundamental to daily life and have become an 
important aspect of basic literacy. The field of computer science 
and technology plays a pivotal role in the rapid growth of China’s 
economy through the training of a talented pool of scientists, 
engineers, and IT professionals. 
 In this paper, we present developments in professional computing 
education for undergraduate majors and fundamental computer 
education for non-majors in China, as the nation moved from an 
elite computer education model to a “mass education” model.   
 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
SIGCSE’10, March 10–13, 2010, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-885-8/10/03...$10.00. 
While some aspects of the evolution of computer science 
education are unique to China, many issues are those faced by 
computer science educators worldwide regarding innovation, 
internationalization, and relevance to society’s needs. As an 
example of the changes in computer science education in China, 
we describe the Computer Science major in the School of 
Electronics Engineering and Computer Science at Peking 
University, one of the nation’s leading comprehensive research-
based universities. 
2. BACKGROUND IN COMPUTING 
EDUCATION IN CHINA*  
The flagship computing discipline in China is Computer Science 
and Technology.  Established in 1956, this field has gone through 
over 50 years’ development to become the largest undergraduate 
major in China [2].  
The current curriculum for Computer Science and Technology 
was proposed in 1996, modeled after ACM Computing Curricula 
1991.  This curriculum emphasized computer software and 
computer applications, built on the foundations of computer 
science and engineering. However, the ACM curriculum model 
for computing education did not completely meet the economic 
needs nor the scale of the Chinese educational system. 
In 1998, the policies of the Ministry of Education (MOE) in 
China promoted the transition from “elite education” to “mass 
education” by dramatically increasing university enrollments. 
Before 1998, only a very small elite group of students were 
admitted to China’s universities through an intensely competitive 
national examination system. The change to “mass education” 
was driven by the huge growth in the high tech economic sector 
in China as well as the desire to expand educational opportunities 
to a greater portion of China’s talented youth.  Correspondingly, 
more and more universities built up their computer education 
programs. At the end of 1994, there were only 318 universities 
offering the computer specialty programs in China; and by 2002, 
there were 484 programs; by 2003, 505 programs, an increase of 
4%; by 2004, 652 programs, an increase of 29%  [6].  
 
By the end of 2007, there were 598 universities that had 
departments of computer science running 847 computing related 
specialty programs, with total enrollment of over 430,000 
undergraduates. In addition to these Computer Science and 
Technology programs, there were more than 10 computing related 
                                                                 
* 
Supported 
in 
part 
by 
NSF 
Grant 
#0722341, 
CPATHi18n: 
Internationalization of Computer Science: the Pacific Rim Community 
Model. 
 
396
disciplines and nearly 2,000 related specialty programs with 
nearly 1,000,000 undergraduates.  Table 1 gives the size of some 
of the key disciplines.   
 
Table 1: Key Computer-related Disciplines (2005) 
Discipline 
Number 
of 
Departments  
Computer Science and Technology 
771 
Information 
Management 
and 
Systems 
501 
Information and Computing Science 
441 
E-commerce 
280 
Educational Technology 
202 
Software Engineering 
149 
Geographic Information Systems 
137 
Network Engineering 
115 
Information Engineering 
51 
Information Security 
49 
 
Realizing the fact that increasing enrollments had adverse effects 
on the quality of education, the Ministry of Education in China 
started the “Quality Engineering Plan” (http://www.zlgc.org/) in 
2003. The following six initiatives were carried out to improve 
and ensure the quality of higher education graduates: approval of 
novel specialty disciplines; recognition of national best courses, 
best textbooks and qualified course repositories; innovative 
practical education and training of China’s talent pool; 
certification of distinguished teachers and qualified educational 
teams; evaluation of education quality; and higher education 
backup for China’s western region.  In addition, efforts were 
made to reform and improve creativity and to develop excellent 
quality curricula.  In the same year, the Advisory Committee for 
the Computing Discipline of the Ministry of Education kicked off 
a program of reform for China’s Computing Curricula. The main 
tasks of the Advisory Committee were as follows: advise the 
MOE regarding strategic directions for undergraduate disciplines; 
provide curriculum guidance to educational institutions; and 
supervise the evaluation of computing education.  
Based on a set of field trips to 10 universities and 12 IT 
companies and based on information obtained through thousands 
of questionnaires, the following observations were made [7]:  
First, it takes too much time to train graduates to be ready to work 
in industry given the nation’s intense workforce needs. In 2004, 
the MOE predicted that the incremental demand for computing 
talent is 1 million people per year.   Second, students are losing 
confidence in the overall competence achieved through the 
Computer Science and Technology major, compared with other 
majors. “What is my core competence? The other majors seem to 
be able to do all I can do!”  Seniors and graduates complain about 
the education/training received.  Third, Computer Science and 
Technology has fallen from its rank as the 1st or 2nd choice by 
high school students when they chose majors in university to its 
current rank of 5th or 6th.  Finally, despite government statistics 
that show a big shortage of IT professionals, the future for 
graduates is unbalanced.  Top-level graduates in China are in very 
high demand and there is a severe shortage of these highly 
qualified individuals.  Conversely, the unemployment problem for 
the graduates from lower-level institutions grew significantly after 
2000 due to enrollment surges. 
The Advisory Committee for the Computing Discipline identified 
four new challenges for computing professional education: (1) 
broadening of the discipline’s intention; (2) development of 
greater independence of sub-disciplines within the discipline of 
computing; (3) addressing the diversity of society’s needs for 
information technology; (4) coping with the popularization and 
huge scale of computing education.  These factors impelled the 
Ministry of Education to analyze the precise role of computing 
education within the university educational system and the 
maximum utility of resources. Merely applying the name 
“Computer Science and Technology” to hundreds of new 
departments and programs was clearly not enough.  
 
3. PROFESSIONAL COMPUTING 
EDUCATION FOR MAJORS 
 
3.1 Pyramid Model of Computing Education 
Based on research conducted by the Ministry of Education 
regarding the role of computing education and society’s needs for 
computing professionals, a new pyramid model of computing 
education was developed that identified three basic directions for 
training the nation’s high tech workforce: Science-oriented, 
Engineering-oriented and Technology-oriented, with the smallest 
talent pool at the top, and the largest talent pool at the bottom.   
According to Denning et. al, the fundamental question underlying 
the discipline of computing is “what can be automated and how to 
compute effectively,” approached through the three paradigms of 
theory, abstraction and design [5]. The goal of the pyramid model 
of computing education is to develop different talent pools 
working within various sub-disciplines and to utilize appropriate 
 
 
 
397
problem-solving methodologies within the three tiers of the 
pyramid. 
Science-oriented talent focuses on “what can be automatically 
computed effectively.” Education in this tier focuses primarily on 
theory and abstraction paradigms.  This group comprises the 
nation’s distinguished scientific talent pool.  Their role in 
scientific discovery is innovation and creativity through research-
oriented careers.   Engineering-oriented talent is concerned with 
“how to implement automatic computing effectively and at low 
cost.”  Their focus is on theory and design paradigms through 
engineering solutions.  Talented students in this pool are trained 
to master fundamental theories in order to guide engineering 
design and implementation.  Technology-oriented talent is 
concerned with the goal of “making it convenient to use computer 
systems for automatic computing.”  The focus here is on the 
design paradigm.  This talent pool learns theories of system 
construction and receives training in fundamental methods for 
problem description.   With engineering at the forefront, this 
group is prepared to construct application-based computing 
systems that meet customers’ needs.  
 
3.2 Strategies for Professional Computing 
Education 
Integrating the analysis and ideas of ACM-IEEE CC2005, the 
Ministry of Education suggested the following development 
strategies for professional computing education:   
 (1) Encourage universities to develop a variety of directions 
under the name “Computer Science and Technology” based on the 
trade-offs between societal needs and local or regional conditions, 
allowing local decision-making for curriculum development. Each 
university could name its departments as it saw fit and were no 
longer constrained to use the names of the major specialties 
currently approved by the Discipline Program Approval 
Committee of the Ministry of Education, shown in Table 1.  
(2) Provide further educational opportunities for young 
teachers, enhancing their academic capabilities. Young teachers 
can study abroad with support from the China Scholarship 
Council, MOE and universities; visit other domestic universities; 
take free courses provided by the High Education Institutions 
Teacher 
online 
training 
center, 
paid 
by 
MOE,  
(http://www.enetedu.com/).  Many places also provide summer 
seminar and training courses with very low registration fee.  In 
2001, the Ministry of Education sponsored the first University 
Course Forum of Computer Science to encourage teachers to 
exchange experiences and course materials.  
 (3) Enhance the practical and hands-on ability of students.   
With the increasing emphasis on engineering and technological 
education, experimental courses and internship opportunities are 
seen as important ways to help students improve their practical 
skills. 
 
In a 2007 survey of 53 Chinese universities, 49 said the strategy 
was good for their departments, and 46 departments volunteered 
to serve as pilot programs. With the endorsement of MOE, the 
new strategies are being piloted in 14 universities and large scale 
practice is anticipated in the near future, followed by evaluation 
of these initiatives.  In Section 5, we describe specific strategies 
employed by the School of Electronics Engineering and 
Computer Science at Peking University in Beijing.   
4. FUNDAMENTAL COMPUTER SCIENCE 
EDUCATION FOR NON-MAJORS 
China is also grappling with the challenge of providing 
fundamental computing education for non-computer science 
majors [4][5].  In 1999, courses in the fundamentals of computer 
science became required in most Chinese universities, challenging 
teachers with the role of educating huge number of students from 
many disciplines and with diverse computing backgrounds.  
During the next few years fundamental computing education 
made significant strides:  the knowledge structure became more 
mature, integrated and systematic; the quality of teachers, 
textbooks, and the hardware environments greatly improved.  
However, university-level fundamental computing education has 
the following essential problems and challenges at present: 
(1) The growth of computing-related disciplines. The 
universities need guidelines to keep abreast of the recent 
evolution in professional computing curricula into the five major 
computing areas identified by IEEE-ACM CC2005: CS 
(Computer Science), CE (Computer Engineering), SE (Software 
Engineering), IT (Information Technology) and IS (Information 
Systems) [1]. 
(2) Relationship to professional education in other 
disciplines. The requirements for IT skills in support of other 
disciplines are complex, diverse, and rapidly changing. The 
problem of designing fundamental computing education to fit the 
computing needs of a wide range of disciplines is truly daunting.   
(3) The quality of fundamental computing education. The 
training of huge numbers of high quality IT professionals to meet 
China’s needs has become the problem hotspot of fundamental 
computing education. 
      
The current trends in fundamental computer education are 
characterized by “diversification, modularization, networking and 
integration” [8], meaning diversification in educational objectives, 
knowledge body, and teaching methods; modularization of the 
body of knowledge that is maximally adaptive to developments in 
IT and “student-oriented” educational ideology; embracing of 
network-based educational technologies available through the 
Internet; and integration of fundamental computer education with 
the professional education of other disciplines and of fundamental 
computer education with application-driven computer science.  In 
addition, computer education for non-majors will “orient[ing] to 
applications, emphasizing on practice, focusing on information 
literacy and fitness” [8] [9]  With the rapid growth of information 
technology, students should achieve basic information literacy as 
a foundation for lifelong learning and innovation, which is the 
final goal of higher education. 
5. COMPUTER SCIENCE AT PEKING 
UNIVERSITY 
Peking University, often referred to as the Harvard of China, is 
one of China’s premier research universities.1 At present, Peking 
                                                                 
1  Peking University and Tsinghua University, China’s two most 
prestigious universities, as well as the Chinese Academy of Sciences, are 
located in the Haidian District, a western suburb of Beijing.  Their 
campuses are adjacent to Zhonguancun (China’s Silicon Valley) providing 
rich opportunities for interaction with the leading Chinese and 
international high tech companies.  
 
398
University has 99 key national disciplines (among them 9 
disciplines are nationally ranked number one), 271 research 
institutions and research centres, including 2 national engineering 
research centres,  and 13 national key laboratories.  Peking 
University is a comprehensive university with research and 
educational programs in the basic and applied sciences, social 
sciences, the humanities, engineering, medicine, law, journalism, 
management, and education.  As an example of the many 
dimensions of computer science education in China, we briefly 
describe the Computer Science major at Peking University, 
housed in the School of Electronics Engineering and Computer 
Science (EECS).  
 
5.1 Computer Science Major Requirements 
Each year approximately 3600 new undergraduates matriculate at 
Peking University of which 340 are admitted to the School of 
Electronics Engineering and Computer Science. 2   EECS 
administers four majors: Computer Science and Technology, 
Electronics, Microelectronics, and Machine Perception.  About 
140 to 160 choose to major in Computer Science, and 40 to 60 
choose to major in Machine Perception which is very close to 
Computer Science.  The School of EECS sits at the top level of 
the computer education pyramid and provides science-based 
education for its highly talented group of students.   
Those declaring CS as the major must fulfill the course 
requirements shown in Tables 2-4, and must further specialize in 
one of 9 subareas:  theoretical computer science, software 
engineering, 
database 
and 
data 
management, 
computer 
networking, computer architecture, digital media and HCI, 
artificial intelligence and intelligent perceptiveness, knowledge 
discovery, or  natural language processing.  About 80% of the 
undergraduates apply to work in a faculty research lab.  All 
students must complete a one-year experimental thesis and pass 
an oral defense. These requirements were instituted in 2007 as 
part of EECS’s new strategies for curriculum reform and 
innovation. 
 
Table 2. School of EECS Foundation Classes 
Intro to Information Science and Technology * 
 
Mathematics 
Analysis I/II/III 
Advanced Math I/II 
Advanced Algebra I/II 
Linear Algebra 
Physics  
Mechanics (A,B) 
Electromagnetism (A,B) 
Physics C  
Programming  
Intro to Computing * 
Programming Lab  
Data Structures and Algorithms *  
Data Structures and Alg Lab 
Microelectronics  
Microelectronics and  
Circuit Design  
Circuit Design Lab  
 
                                                                 
2 Peking University is also home to the School of Software and 
Microelectronics which houses the engineering and application-based 
departments:  Digital Arts and Design, Network and Communication 
Technology, Embedded Systems Engineering, Software Technology, E-
Services, Management and Technology, IC Design and Engineering, 
Financial Information Engineering.  This school was ranked number one 
of 36 schools of software established by the MOE’s national initiative in 
engineering and technology-oriented education.    
 
 
Table 3. Computer Science Major Foundation Classes 
(in addition to EECS Foundations; * denotes core course) 
Software  
Compiler and Compiler Lab * 
Operating Systems and Lab * 
Programming Languages 
Intro to Networking * 
Hardware 
Digital Logic and Lab 
Microcomputer Architecture and 
Lab 
Computer Architecture and Lab  
Theory 
Set Theory and Graph Theory 
Algebraic Structures and 
Combinational Theory 
Mathematical Logic 
Probability and Statistics  
Analysis of Algorithms  
Intelligence 
Human Brain and Cognition 
Information Theory 
Artificial Intelligence 
Numerical Computing 
Signals and Systems 
 
Table 4. Computer Science Electives 
Programming 
Problem Solving and 
Programming 
Linux Programming 
MS Windows Programming  
Java Programming 
Software Engineering 
Software Engineering 
Intro to Object-Oriented Design 
Intro to Middleware 
Software Testing 
Service Oriented Architecture 
Theoretical Computing 
Intro to Theoretical Computer Science 
Intro to Random Processes 
Application of Primary Theory of   
numbers 
Data Management 
Intro to Databases(Required) 
Database Theory and Practice 
Data Warehouse and Data Mining 
Web Data Management 
Spatial and Multimedia Database 
Systems 
Computer Networking  
Networking  (Required) 
Intro to Web Technology 
Network and Web Programming 
Network Protocol Analysis and 
Design 
Information Security 
Network storage 
Digital Media and HCI 
Intro to Digital Media 
Digital Video Processing 
Computer Graphics 
Visual Computing and Processing 
Digital Art 
Human Computer Interfaces 
Computer Architecture 
Assembly Language 
Embedded Systems 
Digital Signals and Multimedia 
Processing 
Natural Language Processing 
Intro to Natural Language 
Processing 
Statistical Linguistic Analysis 
Intro to Modern Information 
Retrieval 
Computer Intelligence and 
Knowledge Discovery 
Intelligent Information 
Processing 
Intro to Machine Learning  
Intelligent Information System 
Lab 
Intelligent Perspectives 
Pattern Recognition 
Biological Signal Processing 
Digital Signal Processing 
Voice Signal Processing 
Digital Graphics Processing 
Scientific Writing 
Adv. Information Technologies 
Various courses 
Senior Thesis (required) 
   
 
5.2 Innovation in Computer Science 
Education 
The desire to foster creativity and innovative thinking has 
motivated redesign of the requirements within EECS to allow 
more free electives, research mentoring of students, close 
interactions with industry, and greater exposure to international 
opportunities.  In 2007, the Computer Science Department set up 
an experimental program, the Accelerated Course Plan, to foster 
the development of a new generation of talented individuals 
399
whose 
education 
emphasizes 
creativity, 
leadership, 
and 
international competence.  The ACP was modeled after Peking 
University’s Yuanpei Project, a university-wide initiative 
designed to train the best and brightest as the nation’s future 
leaders.  Under the Computer Science Accelerated Course Plan, 
eight accelerated core courses are offered in lieu of the normal 
courses: Advanced Introduction to Computer Science, Advanced 
Programming 
Practice, 
Advanced 
Data 
Structures 
and 
Algorithms, Advanced Operating System, Advanced Database 
System, Advanced Software Engineering, Advanced Compiler 
Theory and Advanced Computer Architecture. The nation’s 
stellar high school students are recruited to this intensive program 
which allows them to quickly move into upper level courses and 
creative research. 
Another area of innovation promotes cutting-edge academic-
industry interaction.  The department’s Advanced Technologies 
course group sponsors courses to introduce new trends and 
developments in industry to our students, such as “Advanced IT 
Technology” taught by researchers from IBM’s Computer 
Research Lab; “Parallel Computing in Multicore Architectures” 
taught 
by 
engineers 
from 
Intel; 
“Fundamental 
Storage 
Technology” taught by engineers from EMC.    
In the arena of internationalization, our department hosts many 
international lecturers, and during the summer sends students to 
international exchange programs at UCLA, UC Berkeley, 
Stanford, Yale, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
and the University of Oregon, among others.  We also offer a 
wide variety of international collaborative courses. From 2001 to 
2006, we taught the introduction to web technology course in 
collaboration with the University of New England with total 
enrollment of over more than 500 students.  Supported by 
University of Zurich, Switzerland, we successfully offered the 
Artificial Intelligence course broadcast by videoconference in 
2004, 
which 
will 
be 
continued 
in 
fall 
2009. 
See 
http://shanghailectures.org/. 
In  2010, we will offer a collaboratively taught course in Global 
Distributed Software Engineering with the University of Oregon.  
Project teams made up of students from Peking University and the 
University of Oregon will work together across geographic, time 
zone, and cultural differences.  This project is affiliated with the 
NSF CPATHi18n project. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Reform and innovation in computing education in China faces 
many challenges.  In order to meet China’s rapidly changing 
social and economic needs, higher computing education should 
update its educational objectives and ideology, rethink and re-
invent the knowledge body of computing curricula, address the 
individualized needs and talents of its students, and be responsive 
to regional conditions. Furthermore, it is necessary to evolve 
pedagogical methods, re-educate faculty members and evaluate 
the efficiency and quality of education. 
In addition, China should pursue forums for dialog with 
colleagues from other countries on the advances in computing 
education.  In 2008, the First ACM Summit on Computing 
Education in China took place in Beijing, hosted by Tsinghua 
University.  In October 2009, the Ministry of Education convened 
the 5th University Course Forum of Computer Science featuring 
leading U.S. computer science educators as the keynote speakers.  
During the past decade much of the groundwork was laid 
for a renaissance in China’s approach to computer science 
education.  The next decade will be a time for continuing 
innovation, increasing internationalization, and broader expansion 
as we evaluate the outcomes of recent educational initiatives and 
explore the exciting future of computer science education in 
China and its role throughout the world. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper was developed as part of the NSF funded project 
CPATHi18n: Internationalization of Computer Science Education, 
the Pacific Rim Community Model (www.cpathi18n.org) for the 
purpose of educating the computer science education community 
about 
developments 
in 
Pacific 
Rim 
computer 
science 
departments.  Professor Zhang is a CPATHi18n partner, 
representing Peking University, and Professor Lo is co-PI for the 
CPATHi18n project.  Thanks to Xiaoming Li and Zongli Jiang 
from the Advisory Committee of Computing Education China; 
Xiangkui Yao and Kiki Davis, University of Oregon, and the 
anonymous reviewers for help in the preparation of this paper. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] ACM-IEEE CC2005. The overview report of computing 
curricula 2005 
[2] Advisory Committee of Computing Education. 2005. The 
report of strategic study of computing curriculum in China. 
China University Teaching 5 (2005), 7-10. 
[3] Advisory Committee of Computing Education. The 
fundamental computing curriculum for higher education in 
China.  To be published by Press of High Education.  
[4] Cortina, T. J.,  An introduction to computer science for non-
majors using principles of computation.  In Proceedings of 
the SIGCSE Conference (Covington, Kentucky, March 
2007), 218-222. 
[5] Denning, P. J. , Comer, D. E., Gries, D. et. al., 1989.  
Computing as a discipline. Communications of the ACM, 32, 
1, 9-23. 
[6] Li, X.  and Lunt, B., 2006.  Undergraduate computing 
education in China - a brief status and perspective.   In 
Proceedings of SIGITE Conference (Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA, October 19-21, 2006), 35-38. 
[7] Li, X., Chen, P., Zhang, M. and Zhu, M., 2004.  Report of 
the social requirement of talents in computer science and 
technology. Journal of Computer Education 9 (2004), 11-18. 
[8] Myers, J. P. Jr , 1989.  The new generation of computer 
literacy. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin Archive, 21,1 (Feb. 1989), 
177 – 181. 
[9] National Research Council Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, 1999.  Being fluent with 
information technology. Washington, DC National Academy 
Press, 1999 
[10] Urban-Lurain, M. and Weinshank, D. J., 2000.  Is there a 
role for programming in non-major computer science 
courses? Proceedings Frontiers in Education (Kansas City, 
Missouri, October 2000). 
400
