Using Interdisciplinary Bioinformatics
Undergraduate Research to Recruit and Retain
Computer Science Students
Jon Beck
Computer Science
Truman State University
Kirksville, MO
63501
jbeck@truman.edu
Brent Buckner
Biology
Truman State University
Kirksville, MO
63501
bbuckner@truman.edu
Olga Nikolova
Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology
Iowa State University
Ames, IA
50011
olia@iastate.edu
ABSTRACT
An interdisciplinary undergraduate research project in bioin-
formatics, jointly mentored by faculty in computer science
and biology, has been developed and is being used to pro-
vide top-quality instruction to biology and computer science
students. This paper explains the beneﬁts of such a collab-
oration to computer science students and to the computer
science discipline. Speciﬁc goals of the project include in-
creased recruitment of students into computer science and
increased retention within the discipline. The project is also
intended to be particularly attractive to women students.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]: Biology and genetics;
K.3.2 [Computers and Education]: Computer and In-
formation Science Education—Curriculum
General Terms
Experimentation, Human Factors
Keywords
bioinformatics, undergraduate research, interdisciplinary re-
search, women in CS
1.
INTRODUCTION
This paper describes a program of interdisciplinary col-
laborative undergraduate bioinformatics research designed
to stimulate the interest of computer science students, es-
pecially women, to attract new students, to aid in their re-
tention, and to encourage them to enter graduate school in
computer science, bioinformatics, or computational biology
upon graduation.
The number of undergraduate students and undergradu-
ate degrees granted in computer science is declining in the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
SIGCSE’07, March 7–10, 2007, Covington, Kentucky, USA.
Copyright 2007 ACM 1-59593-361-1/07/0003 ...$5.00.
United States[9].
Furthermore, despite eﬀorts to attract
women to the ﬁeld, the numbers for female students are
far below those for males[8]. Various reasons have been put
forward for the overall decline, as well as for the gender
diﬀerential. Among the factors that are causal, or at least
associated with, the overall declines, two are particularly
relevant to students and faculty at our medium-sized public
undergraduate liberal arts institution.
Students don’t see the need for a CS degree. Stu-
dents taking CS courses do not wish to study computers
as an end in themselves, but rather to become proﬁcient
in their use to the extent that they can use the computer
as a tool to accomplish some other, non-computer-related
goal.
A number of software environments make common
programming tasks very accessible to the non-computer sci-
entist. For scientiﬁc computation, high-level interpreted en-
vironments such as matlab R
⃝, Octave, and Mathematica R
⃝
are quite accessible to mathematics, biology, chemistry, and
physics majors and do not require formal computer science
theory.
Similarly, many systems are available for layout,
design, publishing, and web page development.
A declining interest in engineering disciplines. We
have seen a drop in interest among engineering- and physics-
related disciplines in the past 15 years, overall to some de-
gree and among women students in particular. To the extent
that computer science is seen as an engineering discipline, it
suﬀers from this phenomenon. Conversely, we have seen an
increase in interest in disciplines related to the life sciences.
2.
BIOINFORMATICS
Bioinformatics is a relatively new discipline but has rapidly
become an important application area of computer science.
The Computing Curricula 2001 Report from the ACM lists
bioinformatics and computational biology as two of the sci-
entiﬁc computing areas that are a “vital part of the disci-
pline,” whereas the 1991 document of the same body con-
tains no reference to them[5, 7].
LeBlanc and Dyer argue that computer science is situ-
ated to take advantage of the growing importance of bioin-
formatics in biological education[4]. They found that there
is signiﬁcant overlap and strong mapping between the core
knowledge areas contained in the Computing Curricula 2001
Report and the informatics needs of the bioinformatics re-
search community. Further, they argue that computer sci-
ence can be eﬀectively taught in a setting in which bioin-
358
formatics questions form the rationale and motivation for
presenting the core computer science knowledge areas.
The ﬁeld of biological education is undergoing a major
shift, becoming far more quantitative and computational.
The National Academies’ Bio2010 report clearly delineates
this shift, saying that “connections between biology and the
other scientiﬁc disciplines [chemistry, physics, and mathe-
matical sciences] need to be developed and reinforced so
that interdisciplinary thinking and work become second na-
ture”[10]. The report also makes the speciﬁc recommenda-
tion that all biology students should be encouraged to pur-
sue a research experience “as early as is practical in their
education.”
Bioinformatics is an ideal example of a ﬁeld
that facilitates this desired connection between the life and
physical sciences by providing interdisciplinary research ex-
periences.
3.
WOMEN IN CS
While bioinformatics is an exciting and inviting applied
area for any computer science student, we believe it has
special signiﬁcance for female undergraduates. According to
Fisher and Margolis, women and men have diﬀerent motiva-
tions for studying computer science[3]. Speciﬁcally, women
“link their interest in computer science to other arenas.”
In our experience, biological investigations are viewed as
particularly socially relevant by female students, as they so
often have applications that beneﬁt society in areas such
as medicine, nutrition, and public health. This, according
to Rosser, is an excellent way to attract female students to
a science discipline[6, pp 71–72]. A recent study at Point
Loma Nazarene University found that the number one rea-
son female students are attracted toward computer science
as a major discipline is the desire to use computing in an-
other ﬁeld[2].
4.
OUR PROGRAM
We have embarked on a collaborative interdisciplinary re-
search project involving biology and computer science un-
dergraduate students with faculty mentors. The focus of our
research is on the annotation of maize genes and analysis of
their expression patterns based on microarray hybridization
data. We oﬀer our experiences with this project as a model
for eﬀective research-based teaching of undergraduate biol-
ogy and computer science students and as a means of at-
tracting and retaining CS students in general and women in
particular. Our project, partially funded by NSF grants,1
supports four to six biology students and one to two com-
puter science students annually.
In our project, sophomore year genetics students perform
an investigative bioinformatics analysis of microarray data
from global gene expression experiments aimed at under-
standing the shoot apical meristem (SAM) in maize. The
SAM is the above-ground undiﬀerentiated tissue at the tip
of the growing plant shoot.
From this tissue, all above-
ground organs (leaves, etc.) arise. An understanding of the
gene expression patterns in this highly active primordial re-
gion of the shoot is of fundamental importance to biologists.
Few of the SAM-speciﬁc genes in maize have been char-
acterized to date. In this project, students retrieve DNA
1NSF award DBI-0321595, Michael Scanlon, PI, and NSF
award DUE-0436348, Jason Miller, PI.
sequences from a database and perform BLAST2 searches
on these sequences against the repository databases of Gen-
Bank.
BLASTN and BLASTX analyses are evaluated in
an attempt to provide an annotation, based on nucleic acid
sequence identity or amino acid sequence similarity for the
expressed sequence tag DNA probe (EST) on the microar-
ray. Then, the students use the EST sequence as a query in
the Maize Aligned Gene Islands (MAGI) database3 to ac-
quire a longer EST which is used as a query in BLASTN and
BLASTX analyses. In addition, the students perform Inter-
ProScan4 searches on the longest available sequence in an
attempt to identify protein functional domains. These anal-
yses most often provide information that enable the students
to annotate the EST with considerable conﬁdence.
After
each EST is annotated with a gene name, it is placed into a
functional category deﬁned to support the ultimate goal of
facilitating the understanding of the cellular networks and
circuitry involved in SAM function and maintenance, and
in leaf primordial formation. This experience challenges the
biology students to recall, apply and expand their knowledge
gained in courses, especially cell biology, and gives many of
them their ﬁrst opportunity to read the primary literature.
Students in our sophomore-level genetics course perform
the above steps manually on a few ESTs in course lab ex-
ercises.
Biology students for the present research project
are recruited into the project from the genetics course, to
participate in the annotation of the thousands of ESTs that
have been identiﬁed as being diﬀerentially regulated in the
maize SAM.
While all of the above work can be carried out manu-
ally by biology students and their faculty mentors with no
assistance or intervention by computer scientists, it is an
extremely labor-intensive process; so arduous as to make it
almost impossible for the undergraduates to get past the me-
chanics. Making meaningful use of the data set, and adding
value to it in the form of the annotations and analyses dis-
cussed above, requires a robust data storage and manipula-
tion platform. This platform needs integrated tools for the
entire lifecycle of the undergraduate research project. The
phases of the project include receiving and loading the ini-
tial set of raw microarray expression data, the presentation
of this data to the annotators in useful and understandable
formats, automated retrieval of auxiliary and associated in-
formation such as BLAST searches, review of the students’
annotations by the faculty mentors, real-time generation of
statistical analyses of the annotation results, and presen-
tation of the results to the scientiﬁc community. In addi-
tion, the system needs to provide these capabilities securely
and simultaneously to multiple authenticated researchers at
multiple locations. Finally, the data must be backed up to
safeguard the invested eﬀort and time it represents.
The development of such a platform, in our case a rela-
tional database-driven system with a sophisticated, dynamic
web front end, requires resources far beyond those avail-
able to the typical undergraduate biology department. How-
ever, it is the perfect vehicle for a research and development
project for computer science majors. The development of
the system requires signiﬁcant, intense collaboration and co-
operation among biology and computer science students and
2http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/
3http://magi.plantgenomics.iastate.edu/
4http://www.ebi.ac.uk/InterProScan/
359
their faculty mentors. Beyond the development and main-
tenance of the system itself, such a collaboration provides
multiple and signiﬁcant opportunities for open-ended spin-
oﬀbioinformatics and computer science research projects in
such areas as clustering, biological data mining, large data
set problems, distributed computing, and software engineer-
ing.
This interdisciplinary collaboration works to the ad-
vantage of both disciplines. It provides computer scientists
with a valuable experience in working in an applied ﬁeld
and with training in a highly attractive ﬁeld at the intersec-
tion of biology and informatics. It provides biology students
with exposure to informatics concepts. They become quite
familiar with the capabilities and shortcomings of informat-
ics approaches to, and automated processing of, biological
data.
In our experience, female students have been particularly
attracted to the broad interdisciplinary strategies for prob-
lem solving inherent in our research collaborative. Rosser
advises mentors to “use methods from a variety of ﬁelds or
interdisciplinary approaches to problem-solving. Because of
their interest in relationships and interdependence, female
students will be more attracted to science and its meth-
ods when they perceive its usefulness in other disciplines”[6,
p 64].
One female CS student in our research program
stated, “my own experiences . . . argue that interdisciplinary
research is an extremely eﬀective way to recruit women into
computer science research, and to demonstrate the social rel-
evance of computer science as a career discipline for women
. . . I wish to emphasize the signiﬁcance of working in in-
terdisciplinary teams formed of undergraduate students and
faculty members with diﬀerent academic backgrounds.” Even
though this student had no prior experience in biology, she
goes on to argue that bioinformatics in particular provided
the perfect environment for developing computer science
skills and knowledge.
5.
UNDERGRADUATE RESEARCH
According to Becker[1], only through research experiences
do students “attain a higher level of competence in the sci-
ence, mathematics, engineering, and technology ﬁelds” and
in a research setting students best learn and practice the
teamwork, complex problem-solving, and communications
skills they will require after graduation.
Becker goes on
to argue, in fact, that all computer science undergraduates
should engage in research. We agree that research is an es-
sential component of the undergraduate experience and that
the learning that takes place in a research setting cannot be
duplicated in the classroom.
Our project is therefore designed as a research experience
to take advantage of the demonstrated beneﬁts of research
for undergraduates; designed as an interdisciplinary bioin-
formatics endeavor because of the eﬃcacy of bioinformatics
to recruit and retain computer science students.
Our undergraduate research project is set within the con-
text of a larger framework. Truman State University has
an extensive, mature culture of fostering undergraduate re-
search. The authors are participants in Truman’s Mathe-
matical Biology Initiative. This program has the primary
goal of increasing the recruitment and production of stu-
dents equipped to work or enter graduate programs in math-
ematical or computational biology or bioinformatics. This is
done by supporting long-term research opportunities for un-
dergraduate students to analyze problems and to solve them
from two complementary disciplinary perspectives, one in
biology and one in the mathematical or computational sci-
ences.
Participating students are involved in a variety of
cross-disciplinary research experiences at the intersection of
biology and the mathematical and computational sciences
supported by faculty teams.
The research projects span
the range of scales from the molecular to communities and
metapopulations, and include various emphases in mathe-
matical biology, modeling, biostatistics, computational biol-
ogy, and bioinformatics.
Our research programs have a ﬁeld trip component in
which the undergraduates are taken to Research I gradu-
ate schools and to commercial research institutions to meet
with faculty and researchers, including their mentors’ col-
laborators. When the undergraduates see the source of their
microarray data and present results to the researchers, they
gain valuable experience and networking contacts. More im-
portantly, they see the broader relevance of their work and
see how it ﬁts into a larger context of ongoing work.
6.
COLLATERAL BENEFITS
Establishing a fruitful biology and computer science col-
laborative requires that the mentors and students from both
disciplines make an eﬀort to develop at least a rudimentary
understanding of the fundamental principles and methods
of each others disciplines. In our experience, mentors and
students should commit the time to sit in on introductory
courses within the complementary discipline. While this ac-
tivity is diﬃcult to execute in an otherwise busy schedule it
is an excellent opportunity to capture the big picture of a
discipline with which one is unfamiliar. There are also other
valuable dividends of this commitment. The visiting profes-
sor can make relevant comments and contributions during
lectures, adding value to the educational experience. Addi-
tionally, in our experience, students enrolled in the courses
will often enroll in the courses of the collaborator in sub-
sequent semesters.
Thus, this collaboration is a valuable
mechanism to recruit students to courses.
It encourages
the cross disciplinary education that is a desired quality for
students at a liberal arts institution, especially those con-
sidering graduate education.
Lastly, students enrolled in
the courses readily see the intellectual commitment of the
faculty mentors and come to better understand the interdis-
ciplinary nature of modern science.
7.
RESULTS
This program is still in its infancy, having run for nearly
two years and having had one computer science student com-
plete the program. We believe, however, based on the inter-
est this project has generated among the computer science
students here at Truman that collaborative bioinformatics
research has the potential to signiﬁcantly aid our student
recruitment and retention.
Prior to joining the research
project, the female student who has completed the expe-
rience was planning to get a job in IT after receiving her
bachelor’s degree. During the course of her participation in
the research project, her interest in bioinformatics developed
to the degree that, having completed her baccalaureate, she
is now a Ph.D. student in Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology at a Research I institution. A second CS student
is currently involved in the project and has not yet decided
his post-baccalaureate plans.
360
The project is being used as a recruiting tool by the ad-
missions oﬃce and by faculty in visits with prospective stu-
dents. The women’s computer science club, Tru Women in
Computer Science (TWiCS), is using the program as a re-
cruiting tool in its outreach and recruiting eﬀorts at area
feeder high schools during academic year 2006–2007. The
results of these recruiting eﬀorts will be watched carefully
to see what eﬀect they have on attracting new students to
computer science.
8.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors recognize the Truman undergraduate biology
students for devoting endless hours annotating the genes in
this project and for working so closely and willingly with the
computer scientists.
In particular we thank Kate Brown-
ing, Ashleigh Fritz, Lisa Grantham, Eneda Hoxha, Ashley
Lough, and Zhian Kamvar, who have made this project
so enjoyable. We acknowledge the work of our collabora-
tors in providing the framework for this eﬀort, in particu-
lar Michael Scanlon, Patrick Schnable, Marja Timmermans,
and Kazuhiro Ohtsu. Many thanks to Kerrin Smith for her
valuable contributions to the tone, style, and organization
of this manuscript.
9.
ADDITIONAL AUTHORS
Additional author: Diane Janick-Buckner, Biology, Tru-
man State University, djb@truman.edu
10.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Becker. Cutting-edge research by undergraduates
on a shoestring? J. Comput. Small Coll.,
21(1):160–168, 2005.
[2] L. Carter. Why students with an apparent aptitude for
computer science don’t choose to major in computer
science. SIGCSE Bulletin, 38(1):27–31, 2006.
[3] A. Fisher and J. Margolis. Unlocking the clubhouse:
the Carnegie Mellon experience. SIGCSE Bulletin,
34(2):79–83, 2002.
[4] M. D. LeBlanc and B. D. Dyer. Bioinformatics and
Computing Curricula 2001: why computer science is
well positioned in a post-genomic world. SIGCSE
Bulletin, 36(4):64–68, 2004.
[5] E. Roberts, editor. Computing Curricula 2001:
Computer Science Final Report. Association for
Computing Machinery, 2001.
[6] S. V. Rosser. Female-friendly science: applying
women’s studies methods and theories to attract
students. Pergamon Press, Elmsford, NY, 1990.
[7] A. B. Tucker, editor. Computing Curricula 1991:
Report of the ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Curriculum Task
Force. Association for Computing Machinery, 1991.
[8] J. Vegso. Interest in CS as a major drops among
incoming freshmen. Computing Research News, 17(3),
May 2005.
[9] J. Vegso. Drop in CS bachelor’s degree production.
Computing Research News, 18(2), March 2006.
[10] P. T. Whitacre, editor. Bio2010: Transforming
Undergraduate Education for Future Research
Biologists. National Academies Press, Washington,
DC, 2003.
361
